+++

categories="article"
date="2019-09-30T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2019-03"
issue_name="2019 - #03"
issue_id="2"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/03/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="15"
udc="621.039.4"
title="System development of intelligent operator support at unit no. 1 of the Novovoronezh NPP-2"
original_title="Развитие системы интеллектуальной поддержки оператора на энергоблоке № 1 НВАЭС-2"
authors=["GusevIN", "SolovyevBL", "PadunSP", "MayorovaMM"]
tags=["OISS", "technological process", "interactive procedure", "management optimization", "technical condition analysis", "power unit model", "limits and conditions of operation", "multi-user program", "start-up operations"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.01"

+++

In 2014, the Novovoronezh NPP, VNIIAES and JSC «Innovative firm SNIIP-Atom» took the decision to develop the system of intellectual support of the operator (SIPO). The main purpose of the SIPO is the implementation of an important function for the safe and reliable operation of NPP equipment – the possibility of analyzing the process in real time and its projection in the future, which allows issuing recommendations to the operator on the optimal process control, especially in situations with limited time for decision-making.

As part of the development of the SIPO, a software model of nuclear power unit was created as part of the upper-level system (IAS) of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 Unit 1, and step-by-step interactive procedures (IP) for managing operating processes of the power unit are being developed.

For reducing the load on the operator when performing complex switching on the equipment, the SIPO supported with IP must ensure the following:
– Continuous transmission of information about the status of the nuclear power plant, the dynamics of variables essential for ensuring safety and efficiency of the equipment collected from the automated control system of technological processes (ACSTP) of the unit;
– Issuance of the analyzed information to the operator in the form convenient for making management decisions in the control of the technological process;
– Immediate notification of all stakeholders about the current status of the power plant and planned operations.

SP for Unit 1 of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 start-up is examined as an illustration of the possibilities of interactive procedures and solutions to the problems of reducing the load on the operator. The SP allowing online control and management of the NPP unit start-up process is developed for the first time. Starting up Russian NPP units was performed previously strictly based on the approved hard copy of the program of the power unit start-up, which is associated with a number of significant drawbacks.

### References

1. Gelovani V.A., Bashlykov A.A., Britkov V.B., Vyazilov E.D. Intellectual decision support systems in emergency situations. Moscow. Institute of System Analysis RAS Publ., 2001, 304 p. (in Russian).
2. Lebedev V.G. Principles of constructing an intelligent user interface for decision support systems by the operator. Problemy Upravleniya. 2004, no. 3, pp. 43-47 (in Russian).
3. Nechaev Y.I., Petrov O.N. Information support of the operator in the analysis of complex situations. State Marine Technical University of St. Petersburg, 2007. Available at http://www.ict.edu.ru/vconf/files/9223.pdf/ (accessed Jun 26, 2018) (in Russian).
4. Britkov V.B. Communication Emergency Decision Support Systems Integration. The International Emergency Management Society Conference National and International Issues Concerning Research and Applications. Copenhagen, Denmark, 1997, pp. 395-403.
5. Britkov V.B. Distributed System for Emergency Decision Support With System Analysis And Modern Information Technology Implementation. Proc. of the International Emergency Management and Engineering Conference. Montreal, Canada, 1996, pp. 8792.
6. Germond A.J., Niebur D. Survey of Knowledge-Based System in Power System Europe. Proc. IEEE, May 1996, v. 80, no. 5, pp. 732-744.
7. Kirscher D.S., Wollenberg B.F. Intelligent Alarm Processing in Power Systems. Proc. IEEE, May 1996, v. 80, no. 5, pp. 663-672.
8. Leibowitz J. An Expert System Forecast. Journal of Information Systems Management. Spring 1994, pp. 69-72.
9. Nelson W.B. REACTOR: An Expert System for Diagnosis and Treatment of Nuclear Reactor Accident. Proc. of the II Conference of American Association Artificial Intelligence. Aug. 1983, pp. 296-301.
10. Shaw R.W. Adapting the RAINS model to develop strategies to reduce acidification in the USSR. Proc. of International Institute for Applied System Analysis. Austria, 1990, pp. 184-188.
11. Yeremeyev A.P. A Parallel Model for a Production System of the Tabular Type. Soviet Journal of Computer and Systems Sciences. July August 1991, v. 29, no. 4, pp. 80-88 (in Russian).
12. Bashlykov A.A. SPRINT-RV – intelligent information system for realtime decision support when managing complex modes of operation of ecologically dangerous objects and technologies on the basis of industrial computers. Pribory. 2001, no. 2, pp. 24-26 (In Russian).
13. Sobajic D.J., Pao Y.H. An Artificial intelligence system for power system contingency screening. IEEE Transaction on Power Systems. 1988, v. 3, no. 2, pp. 647-653.
14. Rouse W.B Models of human problem solving detection, diagnosis and compensation for system failures. Automatica. 1983, v. 19, no. 6, pp. 613-625.
15. Lee D.T. Expert Decision-Support Systems for Decision-Making. Journal of Information Technology. 1988, v. 3, no. 2, pp 85-94.