+++

categories="article"
date="2019-09-30T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2019-03"
issue_name="2019 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/03/03.pdf"
first_page="28"
last_page="39"
udc="621.039.5"
title="A study into the starting modes of the VVER-1000 RCP in an earlier inoperative loop"
original_title="Исследование режимов включения ГЦН ВВЭР-1000 ранее не работавшей петли"
authors=["BraginIE", "BelozerovVI"]
tags=["mode", "reactor coolant pump (RCP)", "circulation loop", "reactor plant", "scram", "reactivity coefficient", "safety margin", "reactor plant power"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.03"

+++

To simulate the starting mode of an RCP in an earlier inoperative loop, KORSAR/GP, a code supporting coupled numerical simulation of neutronic and thermal-hydraulic transients in a VVER reactor plant in operating and emergency conditions, was chosen as the computational tool.

Studying these modes using thermal-hydraulic codes makes it possible to analyze the course of transients and certain emergency processes without using commercial test procedures, which contributes to laying the groundwork for addressing the issues involved in ensuring the reliability, operating safety and efficiency of nuclear power plants.

Increased requirements to the safety of NPPs identify the need for getting rid of excessive conservatism in the analysis based on which requirements to safety systems are formulated, as well as for enhancing the knowledge of the regularities of thermal-hydraulic transients based on advanced computer programs (or codes) designed for improved computational analysis of non-stationary thermal hydraulics in the water-cooled reactor circulation circuits in emergency and transient modes relying on inhomogeneous non-equilibrium mathematical models of two-phase flows and on a detailed description of the physical transient regularities.

The purpose of the study is to analyze computationally the starting of a VVER-1000 RCP in an earlier inoperative loop at different reactor plant power values. To do this, one requires to develop the VVER-1000 reactor primary circuit computational pattern to simulate the transient taking place as one RCP is started, to conduct a further analysis, and to compare the key monitored reactor coolant and core parameters (power, temperature, flow rate, etc.).

### References

1. Afrov A.M., Andrushechko S.A., Ukraintsev V.F., Vasilyev B.Yu., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kokosadze E.L., Ivanov E.A. VVER51000: Physical Principles of Operation, Nuclear Fuel, Safety. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2006, 488 p. (in Russian)
2. Baklushin R.P. Operation of the NPP. Part 1. Work of the NPP in Power Supply Systems. Part II. Treatment of Radioactive Waste. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2011, 304 p. (in Russian).
3. Ivanov V.A. NPP Operation. Saint-Petersburg. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1994, 384 p. (in Russian).
4. Nigmatulin I.N., Nigmatulin B.I. Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 168 p. (in Russian).
5. Vyhovsky, S.B., Ryabov, N.O., Semenov, A.A., Chernov, E.V., Bogachek, L.N. Physical and Structural Features of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2011, 376 p. (in Russian)
6. Bukrinsky A.M. Emergency Transients at Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1982, 142 p. (in Russian)
7. GOST P 50088-92. Water-to-water Nuclear Reactors Power (WWER). General Requirements to Carrying out Physical Calculations. Moscow. Gosstandart Rossii Publ., 1994, 13 p. (in Russian).
8. Baklushin R.P. Operational Modes of the NPP. Moscow. Izdatel’skij dom MEI Publ., 2012, 532 p. (in Russian).
9. Belozerov V.I., Zhuk M.M. VVER51000 Reactor Physics and Operating Conditions. Minsk. Dom Pressy Publ., 2012, 144 p. (in Russian).
10. Margulova T.Kh. Nuclear Power Plants. Ed. 5th. Mоscow. IzdAT Publ., 1994, 296 p. (in Russian).
11. Software Complex KORSAR/GP, Certification Passport of Software No. 263 from 09/23/ 2009. Moscow. NTC YaRB Publ., 2009 (in Russian).
12. RELAP5/MOD3 Code Manual. Code Structure, System Models, and Solution Methods. Idaho. National Engineering Laboratory, 1995, 418 p.
13. Dragunov Yu.G., Bykov M.A., Vasilenko V. A., Migrov Yu.A. Experience of application and development of the settlement KORSAR code for justification of safety of the NPP with VVER. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/mntk2005/Конференция/Сторонние_организации/ФГУП%20НИТИ/07_Мигров%20Ю.А.pdf (accessed Apr 10, 2019) (in Russian).
14. Kazantsev A.A., Sergeev V.V., Belozerov V.I., Efremov A.Yu. Simulation of transient processes for VVER-1000 reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2009, no 1, pp. 98-104 (in Russian).
15. Nuclear Safety. Handbook. Moscow. Concern Rosenergoatom Publ., 1994, 250 p. (in Russian).
16. Weinberg A., Wigner E. Physical Theory of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Inostrannaya Literatura Publ., 1961, 733 p. (in Russian).
17. Belozerov V.I., Sergeev V.V., Kazantsev A.A., Pozdnyakov A.N., Kanyshev M.Yu. Neutron-physical and thermohydraulic model VVER-1000 for personnel training. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2008, no. 2, pp. 99-106 (in Russian).
18. Gordon B.G. Fundamentals of regulation of safety in the use of atomic energy. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 2009, 263 p. (in Russian).
19. Petrosyants A.M. Nuclear Energy. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1981, 272 p. (in Russian).
20. Asmolov V.G., Blinkov V.N., Kovalevich O.M. Fundamentals of NPP Safety. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2010, 93 p. (in Russian).