+++

categories="article"
date="2019-09-30T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2019-03"
issue_name="2019 - #03"
issue_id="2"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/03/09.pdf"
first_page="96"
last_page="107"
udc="621.039.531"
title="Analyzing the causes for the dispersion of the fast reactor spent fuel pin cladding properties"
original_title="Анализ причин разброса свойств оболочек отработавших твэлов быстрого реактора"
authors=["ShemyakinVN", "KinevEA", "KozlovAVlad", "PortnykhIA", "PanchenkoVL", "EvseevMV"]
tags=["fuel pin", "cladding", "swelling rate", "corrosion", "grain size", "high-temperature embrittlement", "fabrication technology"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.09"

+++

The swelling, corrosion and high-temperature embrittlement behavior of the fast-neutron sodium-cooled reactor standard and test fuel pin cladding was studied following the operation up to a damaging dose of 55 to 69 dpa. The tested characteristics were found to differ sensitively in conditions similar to irradiationfor the claddings of the experimental tube conversion technology. Unlike the standard fuel pin claddings, the test pin claddings were additionally heated in the process of fabrication to homogenize the solid solution at different temperatures and austenitization times. On the whole, this led to an increased cladding resistance due to the damaging factor of the reactor environment. The positive effect is explained by the influence of carbon and the morphology of swelling-reducing alloying elements, as well as by the nature of the carbide and intermetallide phase separation. However, the dispersion of the post-irradiation properties which remained significant and was also earlier observed in the standard pins, is explained by potential differences in the heat treatment technology and the irradiation temperature in conditions of a hard-to-control coolant flow velocity. The swelling rate and the in-fuel corrosion depth for the test technology tubes were respectively 0.04 to 0.058 %/dpa and 20 to 47 μm; similar values for the test material are 0.036 to 0.056 %/dpa and 15 to 35 μ m respectively. The short-term mechanical properties of the test fuel pins at a temperature of 600°C showed a smaller tendency towards high-temperature embrittlement. The dispersion of the properties was caused by the chemical and structural heterogeneity as the result of the tube fabrication.

### References

1. Bakanov M.V., Maltsev V.V., Oshkanov N.N., Chuev V.V. The main results of operation of structural materials in active zones of the BN-600 reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no. 1, pp. 177-186 (in Russian).
2. Bakanov M.V., Maltsev V.V., Oshkanov N.N., Chuev V.V. The main results of workability control of fuel rods with new generation austenitic steel claddings. Ibid, pp. 187-195 (in Russian).
3. Portnykh I.A., Glushkova N.V., Panchenko V.L., Kinev E.A., Kozlov A.V. Radiation swelling differences of pin covers from steel CHS-68 under close conditions of a neutron irradiation. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i novye materialy. 2007, no. 1 (68-69), pp. 377-388 (in Russian).
4. Barsanova S.V., Kozlov A.V., Shilo O.B. Irradiation influence by fast neutrons on change of austenitic EK-164 and CHS-68 steels mechanical properties. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i novye materialy. 2018, no. 1 (96), pp. 4-12 (in Russian).
5. Bakanov M.V., Chuev V.V., Kryukov O.V., Lukin A.V., Bychkov S.A., Budanov Yu.P., Korostin O.S., Tselischev A.V., Tarasyuk V.B. Structural condition optimizations of cover pipe material from steel CHS068 in cold working condition. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2005, no. 1, pp. 139-145 (in Russian).
6. Tselischev A.V., Ageev V.S., Budanov Yu.P., Ioltukhovskj A.G., Mitrofanova N.M., Leont’eva-Smirnova M.V., Shkabura I.A., Zabud’ko L.M., Kozlov A.V., Mal’tsev V.V., Povstyanko A.V. Working out of constructional steel for pins and assemblages of fast sodium reactors. Atomnaya Energiya. 2010, v.108, iss. 4, pp. 217-222 (in Russian).
7. Spitsyn E.V., Tselischev A.V., Budanov Yu.P. Research of influence of austenitic heating modes on structural condition and characteristics of long durability and creep of pin pipes from austenitic steel CHS68-ID. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i novye materialy. 2015, no. 2 (81), pp. 4-14 (in Russian).
8. Kinev E.A. Correlation of high dose radiating swelling of a 16Cr - 15Ni steel class with the size of grain. Perspektivnye materialy. 2019, no. 3, pp. 39-46 (in Russian).
9. State Standard 9553-2017. Glass and Products from it. A Method of Definition of Density. Moscow. Izdatel’stvo Standartov Publ., 2018 (in Russian).
10. Gulyaev A.P. Material Science. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1977, 646 p. (in Russian).
11. Tselischev A.V., Ageev V.S., Budanov Yu.P., Mitrofanova N.M., Novikov V.V. Development and application of the microstructural approach for creation of radiation proof austenitic steels. VANT. Ser. Fizika radiatsionnykh povrezhdenij i radiatsionnoe materialovedenie. 2006, no. 1 (66), pp. 304-312 (in Russian).
12. Novikov I.I. The Theory of Thermal Processing of Metals. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1986, 480 p. (in Russian).
13. Goldshteyn M.I., Grachev S.V., Veksler Yu.G. Special Steels. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1985, 408 p. (in Russian).
14. Vatulin A.V., Tselischev A.V. Constructional steels for active zone of reactors on fast neutrons. Metallovedenie i Termicheskaya Obrabotka Metallov. 2004, no. 11, pp. 13-18 (in Russian).
15. Zelenskiy V.F., Neklyudov I.M., Chernyaeva T.P. Radiating Defects and Swelling of Metals. Kiev, Naukova dumka Publ., 1988, 296 p. (in Russian).