+++

categories="article"
date="2019-09-30T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2019-03"
issue_name="2019 - #03"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/03/13.pdf"
first_page="148"
last_page="153"
udc="621.34"
title="Format for storing data from thermodynamic and thermophysical experiment"
original_title="Формат хранения данных термодинамического и теплофизического эксперимента"
authors=["PronyaevVG", "NovikovGE", "ChusovIA", "DidenkoVI"]
tags=[" "]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.13"

+++

A simple scheme for organizing data storage and retrieval for thematic areas in the field of the use of atomic energy is presented. It is based on the use of the concept of physical observables, presenting the results of a given experiment or an evaluated data. The database may contain, in addition to the data itself in the form of tables in text format, or equations, also the necessary bibliographic information. The scheme is practically implemented as a relational database of thermodynamic properties of liquid metal coolants. It can be quite easy adapted for use in other thematic areas (thermal hydraulics, materials science, physicochemical properties of materials and mass transfer). Such a transition does not require any additional programming, but is based on creating and maintaining dictionaries of physical observables for these thematic areas, replenished when data of a new type are entered.

### References

1. Smith W.R., Missen R.W. Chemical Reaction Equilibrium Analysis: Theory and Algorithms. N..Y.: John Wiley, 1982, 364 p.
2. Thermodynamic Properties of Individual Substances: Reference Publication in 4 Volumes. Volume 1, Book 2. Ed. Acad. V.P. Glushko. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1979, 823 p. (in Russian).
3. Thermodynamic Constants of Substances: Reference Publication. Volume 1. Ed. Acad. V.P. Glushko. Moscow. VNIITI Publ., 1965, 185 p. (in Russian).
4. Chase M.W. Jr. NIST.JANAF Thermochemical Tables, Fourth Edition. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data Monograph and Suppl., Monograph 9, Part I and Part II, 1998, 1963 p.
5. Knacke O., Kubaschewski O., Hesselmann K. Thermochemical Properties of Inorganic Substances. Berlin. Springer.Verlag, 1991, 2412 p.
6. Web.site PI «Atomstandart». Available at: http://atomstandard.ru/ (accessed Jul 20, 2019).
7. Data Center «CDTS». Available at: http://www.iate.obninsk.ru/node/1303 (accessed Jul 20, 2019).
8. ExThermD System. Available at: http://217.15.201.154:8080/ExThermD (accessed Jul 20, 2019).