+++

categories="article"
date="2019-09-30T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2019-03"
issue_name="2019 - #03"
issue_id="2"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/03/14.pdf"
first_page="154"
last_page=""
udc="537.364"
title="Modeling electrochemical deactivation of the graphite surface"
original_title="Моделирование процесса электрохимической дезактивации поверхности графита"
authors=["MyshkinVF", "BespalaEV", "PavliukAO", "BespalaYuR", "NovoselovIYu"]
tags=["irradiated graphite", "electrochemical deactivation", "decommissioning", "leaching"]
rubric = "applicationofnucleartech"
rubric_name = "Application of nuclear tech"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.14"

+++

Irradiated graphite of uranium:graphite reactors, which is a radioactive waste, is formed during the decommissioning of nuclear reactors. The paper presents the results of modeling performed to assess the potential and basic parameters of the electrochemical decontamination method for processing irradiated graphite parts. This treatment makes it possible to reduce activity by removing radionuclides from the most contaminated surface layer. Graphite is proposed to be used as an anode for electrochemical decontamination from radioactive metals. This approach ensures processing a part of graphite waste in the form of bushings or rings without significant additional generation of radioactive waste.

A one:dimensional mathematical model of electrolytic decontamination is proposed, which describes the oxidation processes of metal radionuclides in the surface layer of irradiated reactor graphite, diffusion and electric migration of radionuclide ions from the anode to the cathode. The rate of removing radioactive cesium from irradiated graphite is calculated depending on the anode voltage, the interelectrode gap and the temperature inside the electrolytic cell. The optimal parameters of electrolytic deactivation of irradiated graphite are determined for removing 137Cs radionuclide. It has been shown that it is advisable to carry out the processing at the minimum possible interelectrode gap, the temperature close to the boiling point of the electrolyte and the maximum possible voltage. In particular, at L = 0.5 cm, T = 90°C, E = 10 V removal rate of 137Cs is 0.6 min. The obtained results could be used in conducting experiments aimed at creating a technology for electrolytic deactivation of irradiated graphite and developing electrolysis units for processing radioactive waste.

After experimental verification of the calculation results, this mathematical model can be used for determining the efficiency of existing technological systems for electrochemical decontamination of metallic radioactive waste using various design options for irradiated graphite anodes.

### References

1. Wickham A., Steinmetz H.-J., O’Sullivan P., Ojovan M.I. Updating irradiated graphite disposal: Project ‘GRAPA’ and the international decommissioning network. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2017, v. 171, pp. 34–40.
2. Processing of Irradiated Graphite to meet Acceptance Criteria for Waste Disposal. Results of a coordinated research project / IAEA TECDOC No. 1790. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEAbooks/10978/Processing-of-Irradiated-Graphite-to-Meet-Acceptance-Criteria-for-Waste-Disposal (accessed Mar 14, 2018).
3. Izmest’ev A.M., Pavlyuk A.O., Kotlyarevskij S.G. Experience of JSC «PDC UGR» in solving the problem of radioactive waste in non-projected storage facilities. Bezopasnost’ Yadernykh Tehnologij i Okruzhayuschej Sredy. 2013, no. 3-4, pp. 84-87 (in Russian).
4. Pavlyuk A.O., Kotlyarevskiy S.G., Bespala E.V., Volkova A.G., Zakharova E.V. Analysis of capability of reducing potential hazard of radioactive waste under thermal treatment. Bulletin of the Tomsk Polytechnic University, Geo Assets Engineering. 2017, v. 328, no. 8, pp. 24-32.
5. Bushuev A.V., Kozhin A.F., Zubarev V.N. Radioactive contamination of spent reactor graphite. Atomnaya energiya. 2014, v. 117, no. 3, pp. 156-159 (in Russian).
6. Blondel A., Moncoffre N., Toulhoat N., Bererd N., Sibermann G., Sainsot P., Rouzaud J.-N., Deldicque D. New advances on the thermal behaviour of chlorine in nuclear graphite. Carbon. 2014, v. 73, pp. 413-420.
7. Kashcheev V.A., Ustinov O.A., Yakunin S.A., Zagumennov V.S., Pavlyuk A.O., Kotlyarevskiy S.G., Bespala E.V. Technology and facility for incinerating irradiated reactor graphite. Atomic Energy. 2017, v. 122, no. 4, pp. 252-256.
8. Vulpius D., Baginski K., Kraus B., Thomauske B. Thermal treatment of neutron-irradiated nuclear graphite. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2013, v. 265, pp. 294-309.