+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="02"
file="/pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-02.pdf"
first_page="13"
last_page="20"
udc="621.039.56"
title="Diagnostic system based on condition turbogenerator Petri nets"
original_title="Система диагностики состояния турбогенератора на основе сетей Петри"
authors=["KachurSA", "ShakhovaNV"]
tags=["automated control system", "the state of the stator winding", "turbo generator", "diagnostics system", "acoustic method", "emergency", "Petri nets", "identifying violations", "analysis of the most “hot spots”", "probabilistic model", "stochastic model"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.02"

+++

The objective of the study is to construct the automated monitoring systems and process control turbine generator based on an acoustic analysis of damage of the stator to enhance efficiency of operation of nuclear power plants in general.

To achieve this goal it is necessary to develop information=measuring system in which information on the status of the turbogenerator stator windings supplied by l detector noise on the surface of the turbine generator. Measurements of noise levels are carried out with a Dt time interval As a method of identifying the condition of theturbogenerator is used method of acoustic analysis of the most “hot spots” of the turbogenerator. The general solution of the problem of constructing information=measuring system of acoustic noise turbine generator based on finding high risk of damage to the stator. For the object in question will take the following interpretation elements of Petri nets: the transition – element of the system; position – set output element of the system; marker – a sign of the presence of the vector signal at the output member; arc – a signaling channel; triggering transition is meant to include an item in the current structure. Probability of success the transition will be considered as the probability of transmission of a plurality of input positions of the transfer of at least one marker and the implementation of a set of constraints (conditions) that are associated with this transition.

Model results of the automated control system of the turbine generator based on stochastic Petri nets, as a graph of interconnected sets of transitions, positions and arcs. Arcs compared the probability model proposed automated control system of the turbine generator can be used to improve existing automated systems of control and regulation in order to increase operational safety of nuclear power plants. Application of the proposed structure of the information-measuring system of turbine generator allows diagnostics condition of the turbogenerator in the initial stages of formation damage and increase the speed of the measurement process ten times.

A stochastic model of the automated monitoring systems and process control turbine generator based on Petri nets, allowing to detect local changes in the state of the stator windings of turbogenerator. The model makes it possible to reduce the dimension of the problem by selecting a subset of states, determining the risk of damage to the stator. The model is characterized by simplicity and high speed.

### Ссылки

1. Аlekseev B.А. Opredelenie sostoyaniya (diagnostika) krupnykh turbogeneratorov. Moscow. NTS EHMАS Publ., 2001. 152 p. (in Russian).
2. Emel’yanov I.YA. Upravlenie i bezopasnost’ yadernykh ehnergeticheskikh ustanovok. – Moscow. Аtomizdat Publ., 1975. 280 p. (in Russian).
3. Eremenko V.А. Puti obespecheniya bezopasnogo upravleniya atomnymi ehnergeticheskimi ustanovkami. Kiev. Tehkhnika Publ., 1988. 256 p. (in Russian).
4. Ostrejkovskij V.А. EHkspluatatsiya atomnykh stantsij. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1999. 928 p. (in Russian).
5. Mamikonyants L.G. Razrabotka tipovykh programm i metodik kompleksnykh obsledovanij, normativov i kriteriev otsenki tekhnicheskogo sostoyaniya i vozmozhnostej dal’nejshej ehkspluatatsii ehlektrooborudovaniya vysokogo napryazheniya, otrabotavshego opredelen-nymi standartami sroki sluzhby. Moscow.VNIIE Publ., 2000. 154 p. (in Russian).
6. Kachur S.А. Metod akusticheskogo analiza povrezhdenij obmotok statora turbogeneratora. Zb. nauk. pr. SNUYAEtaP. Iss.1(37). Sevastopol’. SNUYAEiP Publ., 2011, pp .21 -25. (in Russian).
7. Popov I.А. Аdaptivnoe upravlenie protsessom kipeniya yadernogo reaktora VVER na osnove modelej setej Petri i metoda naibolee «goryachikh» tochek. Zb.nauk.pr.SNUYAEtaP. Iss. 3(31). Sevastopol’. SNUYAEiP Publ., 2009, pp. 40-48 (in Russian).
8. Piterson D. Teoriya setej Petri i modelirovanie system. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1984, 264 p. (in Russian).
9. Shakhova N.V. Veroyatnostnaya model’ povrezhdeniya statora turbogeneratora. Zb. nauk. pr. SNUYAEtaP. Iss.2(38). Sevastopol’. SNUYAEiP Publ., 2011, pp. 89-94 (in Russian).