+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file="/pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-04.pdf"
first_page="30"
last_page="40"
udc="621.039.513:621.039.526"
title="Development and verification of the TR-BN program for validation of the normal operation modes in the BN reactors"
original_title="Разработка и верификация программы ТР-БН для обоснования режимов нормальной эксплуатации реакторов БН"
authors=["FadeevID", "DmitrievaIV", "OsipovSL", "RogozhkinSA"]
tags=["verification", "sodium coolant", "steam generator", "error", "program", "reactor plant", "normal operation", "static parameters", "temperature"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.04"

+++

Validation of design parameters for the BN sodium cooled fast reactor plants in the normal operation modes is an important task that has to be solved to determine the safe and optimal operation conditions. Programs existing for this purpose enable computational analyses of individual equipment (for example, a steam generator) or a circulation circuit (secondary and third circuits). In order to accomplish the integrated analysis of the thermal-hydraulic parameters, the TR-BN program has been developed that is intended to define the main design characteristics (temperature, flow rate) for all heat transfer circuits (including the primary circuit) and to optimize the operation algorithms for the BN reactor plants in the normal operation modes at various power levels.

Presented is a brief description of the program, calculational procedure and possible analysis options depending on the steam generator design. The TR-BN program has been verified and cross-verified through comparing the calculated results with operational data from the BN-600 reactor plant and with the results calculated by the Korsar/GP program for the steam generator of the BN-800 reactor. The analysis of the obtained results has shown satisfactory agreement — the maximum relative deviation of the temperature is below 7.5% for sodium; and 14.2 %, for steam. For the parameters calculated by TR-BN, the root-mean-square errors have been defined that characterize the accuracy of the accomplished calculations. It has been shown that the TR-BN program can be used to validate safety of the BN reactor plants in the normal operation modes.

### Ссылки

1. Fadeev I.D., Vorontsov V.E., Dmitrieva I.V., Osipov S.L., Rogozhkin S.A., Shepelev S.F. Raschetnye issledovaniya v obosnovanie parametrov reaktornoj ustanovki BN-800 v rezhimah normal’noj ekspluatacii [The calculation research to validate BN-800 reactor plant parameters in normal operation modes]. Voprosy Atomnoi Nauki i Tehniki, 2015, v. 1, pp. 22-27 (in Russian).
2. Dmitrieva I.V., Osipov S.L., Rogozhkin S.A., Fadeev I.D. Razrabotka programmy «TR-BN» dlya rascheta staticheskih parametrov RU BN. Sbornik dokladov nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii «Teplofizika-2012», Obninsk, 2013, pp. 532-540 (in Russian).
3. Losevskoj G.V., Smirnov M.V. Primenenie koda Korsar/GP dlya rascheta parogeneratorov s natrievym teplonositelem. Sbornik tezisov dokladov na nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii «Teplofizika-2011», Obninsk, 2011, pp. 61-63 (in Russian).
4. Miheev M.A., Miheeva I.M. Osnovy teploperedachi. Moscow, Energy Publ., 1977 (in Russian).
5. Fadeev I.D., Dmitrieva I.V., Osipov S.L., Rogozhkin S.A., Shepelev S.F. Verifikaciya programmy «TR-BN» na baze ekspluatacionnyh dannyh reaktora BN-600. Sbornik dokladov nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii «Teplofizika-2013», Obninsk, 2014, pp. 444-452 (in Russian).
6. RTM 1604.062-90. Rukovodyaschij tehnicheskij material. Rekomendacii, pravila, metodiki rascheta gidrodinamicheskih i teplovyh harakteristik elementov i oborudovaniya yadernyh energeticheskih ustanovok. Part 1, Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1990 (in Russian).
7. GOST R 8.736-2011 Gosudarstvennaya sistema obespecheniya edinstva izmerenij. Izmereniya pryamye mnogokratnye. Metody obrabotki rezul’tatov izmerenij. Osnovnye polozheniya. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2013 (in Russian).