+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="05"
file="pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-05.pdf"
first_page="41"
last_page="50"
udc="539.163"
title="Interactive information system for simulation and visualization of nuclear transformations – nuclear evolution software"
original_title="Cистема моделирования и визуализации ядерных превращений – nuclear evolution software"
authors=["DogovAA"]
tags=["radioactive waste", "transmutation", "decay chain", "graph theory", "Bateman equations", "information systems", "interactive interface"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.05"

+++

The present paper gives a brief review of technique of the isotopic fuel composition changes modeling with ordinary differential equations system describing nuclides transmutation. Suggested algorithms of modeling and calculation of the main parameters for nuclear transformations are based on a directed graph, which improves the speed and accuracy of calculations. The description is given of the designed software system for modeling of radioactive decay transformations and transformations caused by particles flow (neutrons, protons, etc.). The features and functionality of this system are defined.

System distinctive features include, inter alia, simplicity, developed user-friendly interface, high degree of automation of all stages of user work, simulated processes imaging and convenient tools for calculations management and results processing. The described system is aimed at wide range of users from students and post-graduates to university professors and researchers, and can be used to facilitate scientific research and educational process. The proposed system is a convenient assessment tool for the concentration of any isotope in a chain depending on integral flow and time with various original isotopes amounts.

Apart from author developments, current licensed software and visual reference components libraries from leading global producers were utilized for the system creation, which allowed to develop a user-friendly interface and keep abreast of leading software developments. Modelling results are displayed by interactive tables and characteristic curves.

### Ссылки

1. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.H., Lopatkin A.V., Muratov V.G., Orlov V.V. Transmutatsionnyy toplivnyy tsikl v krupnomasshtabnoy yadernoy energetike Rossii. Moscow. State Unitary Enterprise NIKIET Publ., 1999. 156 p. (in Russian).
2. Bateman H. Solution of a System of Differential Equations Occurring in The Theory of Radio-Active Transformation., University of Cambridge, Proc. Phil. Soc. 1910, pp. 423-427.
3. Plyaskin V.I., Kosilov R.A., Manturov G.N. Interactive information system on the nuclear physics properties of nuclides and radioactive decay chains. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tekhniki. ISSN: 2414-1038 2003, v. 2, no.1, pp. 103-109 (in Russian).
4. Manual for reactor produced radioisotopes. IAEA TECDOC-1340, Vienna, 2002. 257 p.
5. Gerasimov A.S., Zaritskaya T.S., Rudik A.P. Handbook of the formation of nuclides in nuclear reactors. Moscow. Energoatomisdat Publ.,1989. 573 p. (in Russian).
6. Depth-first search. In: Introduction to Algorithms, Second Edition. Eds. Cormen Th.H., Leiserson Ch.E., Rivest R.L. and Stein C. The MIT Press. 2001, pp. 540–549.
7. Visual Interface Design. In: About Face 3 The Essentials of Interaction Design. Eds. Cooper A., Reimann R., Cronin D. Indianapolis. Wiley Publishing Inc. 2007, pp. 287-319.
8. Tables of Nuclear Data. Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Nuclear Data Center: [1995-2016]. Avaiable at: http://wwwndc.jaea.go.jp/ (accessed 15 Oct 2015).
9. Chart of Nuclides. The National Nuclear Data Center (NNDC). 2012. Avaiable at: http://www.nndc.bnl.gov/chart/ (accessed 04 Oct 2015).
10. Fusion Evaluated Nuclear Data Library. International Atomic Energy Agency – Nuclear Data Section: 2004. Avaiable at: https://www-nds.iaea.org/fendl21/ (accessed 10 Sep 2015).
11. Kolobashkin V.M., Rubtsov P.M., Ruzhansky P.A., Sidorenko V.D. The radiation characteristics of irradiated nuclear fuel: Directory. Moscow. Energoatomisdat Publ., 1983. 382 p. (in Russian).
12. AndrianovA.A., Dogov A.A., Korovin Yu.A., Kuptcov I.S. The approach to determining the optimal strategy for the nuclear transmutation. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2014, v. 5, no. 2, p. 122 (in Russian).