+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:18:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="06"
file="pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-06.pdf"
first_page="51"
last_page="60"
udc="621.039"
title="RTS&T-2014 code status"
original_title="Статус кода RTS&T-2014"
authors=["DegtyarevII", "NovoskoltsevFN", "LiashenkoOA", "GulinaEV", "MorozovaLV"]
tags=["radiation transport", "microscopic model of hadron-nucleus interaction", "evaluated nuclear data libraries"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.06"

+++

The paper describes the main features of newest version of the RTS&T code system. The RTS&T code (Radiation Transport Simulation and Isotopes Transmutation Calculation) was assigned for detailed Monte Carlo simulation of many particle types (γ, e±, μ, N, p±, K±, KL0,Σ±,0, antinucleons, ions, etc.) transport in a complex 3D geometry’s with composite materials in the energy range from a fraction eV to 20 TeV and calculation of particle fluences, radiation field functionals and isotopes transmutation problem as well. A direct using of evaluated nuclear data libraries (ENDF/B-VI.8/VII.1, ROSFOND, JENDL, BROND etc.) to particle transport and isotopes transmutation modeling in low and intermediate energy regions is the general idea of the RTS&T code. The main changes compared to the previous code version concern the hadron- and photo-production model in the intermediate and high energy regions, hadronic, photoatomic and photonuclear cross section compilations, improved data for charged particle energy losses in composite materials, and nuclear structure data. New developments in modeling of discrete hadronic interactions (implementation of improved versions of hA- and AA-interaction models) are described. A comparison of the recent experimental data on double differential and total yields of diffractive, γ and β-particles resulting from the intermediate-energy hA-interactions is made with different theoretical models of direct hadron production: intranuclear cascade model, quark-gluon string model, parton cascade model and quantum molecular dynamic model combined with generalized exciton-evaporation (Fermi break-up)-fission model to describe of slow particles and residual nuclei emission. The RTS&T-2014 code can be successfully used to verify of continuous-energy data libraries were recorded in the ENDF-6 format. It is possible to use the RTS&T code to simulate of reactors, detectors, spacecraft, radiotherapy treatment planning, criticality calculation and radiation safety analysis. The comparison between calculated and measured data is presented. The geometry definition system and enhanced RTS&T-CAD-interface are described also.

### Ссылки

1. Blokhin A.I., Degtyarev I.I., Lokhovitskii A.E., Maslov M.A. and Yazynin I.A., in Proceedings of the 17th Particle Accelerator Conference, Vancouver, BC, CAN, pp. 258-260, 1998.
2. Degtyarev I.I., Novoskoltsev F.N., Concepts of the Creation and Results of Validation of the Inclusive Hadron Generator in the RTS&T Code for Intermediate and High Energies Using Modern Experimental Data. Vestnik natsional’nogo issledovatel’skogo yadernogo universiteta «MIFI». 2013, v. 2, no. 4, p.461 (in Russian).
3. Salvat F., Fernandez-Varea J.M., Sampau J., ISBN 92-64-02145-0, OECD, 2003.
4. Seltzer S.M., M.J. Berger, Seltzer S.M., Berger M.J. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B12. 1985, pp. 95-134.
5. Tsai Y.S. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1974, v. 46, p. 815.
6. Uzhinskii V.V. JINR preprint E2-96-192, 1996.
7. Andersson B., Gustafson G., Nilsson-Almquist B. Nucl. Phys., 1987, v. 281B, p.289.
8. Amelin N. Preprint CERN/IT/99/6.
9. Gudima K.K., Mashnik S.G. and Sierk A.J., Report LA-UR-01-6804, Los Alamos, 2001.
10. Roesler S., Engel R., Ranft J., The Monte Carlo Event Generator DPMJET-III, Advanced Monte Carlo for Radiation Physics, Particle Transport Simulation and Applications, Proceedings of the Monte Carlo 2000 Conference, Lisbon, 23–26 October 2000, pp. 1033-1038.
11. Nara Y., Otuka N., Ohnishi A., Niita K. and Chiba S. Phys. Rev. C61, 024901, 2000.
12. Herman M., Trkov A., ENDF-6 Formats Manual Data Formats and Procedures for the Evaluated Nuclear Data File ENDF/B-VI and ENDF/B-VII, Report BNL-90365-2009, June 2009.
13. MacFarlane R.E., Muir D.W., Boicourt R.M., Kahler A.C. (ed.), NJOY Nuclear Data Processing System, Version 2012, LA-UR-12-27079 Rev.
14. Cullen D.E., IAEA-NDS-39, Rev. 9, 1996.