+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:17:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file="pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-07.pdf"
first_page="61"
last_page="69"
udc="539.17.013"
title="Improvement both of silicon and uranium neutron data based on integral and differential experiments"
original_title="Уточнение нейтронных констант кремния и урана на основе интегральных и дифференциальных экспериментов"
authors=["AndrianovaON", "LomakovGB", "ManturovGN"]
tags=["evaluated neutron data", "ROSFOND library", "critical experiments", "BFS facility", "neutron transmission"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.07"

+++

This paper presents the results of calculation-to-experiment discrepancy analysis for differential (neutron transmission measurements) and integral experiments from ICSBEP Handbook (series of critical assemblies BFS-79 and BFS-81) carried out at the IPPE to examine the properties of fuel and structural materials on the basis of which were made proposals to corrections of neutron cross-sections for the Russian national library of evaluated neutron data (ROSFOND). The considered study is an example of implementing the framework for co-utilization of differential and integral experiments for neutron data adjustments, which demonstrate the impact of the resonance structure in neutron cross-sections on reactor characteristics measured at the BFS facilities.

One of the current trends in reactor physics is to improve accuracy of reactor characteristics assessment by reducing the neutron data uncertainty component in the overall calculation error. Sophisticated statistical approaches have been proposed and are nowadays widely used for the assessment of reactor characteristics uncertainties caused by nuclear data. Especially valuable is that such approaches provide capabilities to propagate point-wise nuclear data uncertainty on reactor characteristics uncertainties that allows carrying out neutron cross-sections adjustments with due account for both differential and integral experiments.

Neutron cross-sections testing and adjustments can be carried out based on new and more precise measurements of nuclear interaction characteristics as well as by means of revaluation of the existing experimental data sets. Since the capabilities of recent experimental techniques have been virtually exhausted and carrying out new experiments requires substantial time and material expenditures, the most realistic way to reduce the neutron data uncertainty in reactor functional calculations is to use evaluated neutron data obtained by taking into account all the experimental data including previously unconsidered.

### Ссылки

1. Nikolaev M.N. Nuclear Data for Calculations of Fast Reactors. Way to Recent State and Tasks for Future Development. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaja energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 5–16 (in Russian).
2. Evaluation of Proposed Integral Critical Experiments with Low-moderated MOX Fuel. Report ISBN 92-64-01049-1. NEA No. 6047 OECD 2005.
3. Koscheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsiboulia A.M. Verification of neutron data for main reactor materials from rosfond neutron data library on intergral experiments. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaja energetika. 2014, no. 1, pp. 204–214 (in Russian).
4. Kochetkov A.L., Matveenko I.P., Rozhikhin E.V., Tsiboulia A.M. Experiments within maintenance of placement MOX-fuel in reactors VVER]. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaja energetika. 2007, no. 3-1, pp. 99–108 (in Russian).
5. Kochetkov A.L., Matveenko I.P., Semenov M.Ju., Khomiakov Yu.S., Tsiboulia A.M. Critical experiments on BFS-2 facility within maintenance of placement MOX-fuel in reactors BN. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaja energetika. 2007, no. 2, pp. 16–27 (in Russian).
6. Manturov G., Nikolaev M., Tsiboulia A. ABBN-93 Group Constants System. Part 1: Nuclear Constants for Calculation of Neutron and Photon Radiation Fields. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki: Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 1996, v. 1, pp. 59–103 (in Russian).
7. Zabrodskaia S.V., Ignatiuk A.V., Koshcheev V.N., Manokhin V.N., Nikolaev M.N. Proniaev V G ROSFOND – The National Library of evaluated neutron data. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2, pp. 3–21 (in Russian).
8. “MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code, Version 5”, Volume I (LA-UR-3- 1987), Volume II (LA-CP-03-0245), Volume III (LA-CP-03-0284).
9. Nikolaev M., Tsiboulia A., Matveenko I., Briggs J.B., Dean V.F. Criticality experiments: analysis, evaluation, and programs. 4. Benchmark Experiments with Silicon Dioxide Waste Matrix. Transactions of the American Nuclear Society; v. 84; ISSN 0003-018X; Worldcat; CODEN TANSAO; 2001; pp. 280-282; American Nuclear Society 2001 Annual Meeting.
10. International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development – Nuclear Energy Agency, NEA/NSC/DOC(95)03 (September 2011 Edition).
11. Pavlova O.N., Doulin V.A. About the Resonance Self-Shielding for Radioactive and Fission Capture of Uranium-235]. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaja energetika. 2006, no. 2, pp. 75-84 (in Russian).
12. Grigor’ev Yu.V., Sinica V.V., Borzakov S.B., Ilchev G.L., Fajkov-Stan’chik H., Panteleev C.C., Janeva N.B. Issledovanie nejtronnyh sechenij i velichiny α=σγ/σf dlya 235U v oblasti energij 1 MeV – 2 eV. [The study of neutron cross sections and the alpha - value for 235U in the energy region from 1 MeV -to 2 eV] Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 2000, v. 1, pp. 3–9 (in Russian).
13. Nikolaev M.N., Filippov V.V. Measurement of Total Cross-section Structure. Conf: Nuclear Data for Computations Sem. Dubna, Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 1968.
14. Leal L.C., Derrien H., Larson N.M., Guber K.H., Valentine T.E. and Sayer R.O. Nuclear Data Measurements, Analysis and Evaluation at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Support of Nuclear Criticality Safety. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. Supplement 2, pp. 1422-1426 (August 2002).
15. Andrianova O.N. Metody i programmy dlya ocenki vliyaniya neopredelennostej rezonansnoj struktury neitronnykh sechenij na raschetnye harakteristiki yadernykh. [Methods and codes to assess the impact of uncertainties in the resonance structure of neutron cross sections on nuclear reactors characteristics Cand. tech. sci. diss.]. Moscow. NRC «Kurchatov Institute». 2015, 152 p. (in Russian)].
16. Tsiboulia A., Matveenko I., Nikolaev M., PU-MET-MIXED-001. Critical Experiments with Heterogeneous Compositions of Plutonium, Silicon Dioxide, and Polyethylene. International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments, NEA/NSC/DOC(95)03, September 2006 Edition.