+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/01/11.pdf"
first_page="100"
last_page="110"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Radiation characteristics of REMIX-fuel multirecycling in VVER-1000 reactor"
original_title="Радиационные характеристики РЕМИКС-топлива при многократном рецикле в реакторах ВВЭР-1000"
authors=["PostovarovaDV", "KovalevNV", "OneginMS", "BibichevBA"]
tags=["REMIX fuel", "fuel cycle", "water moderated water cooled power reactor", "uranium", "plutonium", "uranium multirecycling", "plutonium multirecycling", "isotope composition", "equivalent dose", "spent nuclear fuel"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.11"

+++

In this article REMIX fuel multirecycling in VVER 1000 reactor is considered. The REMIX fuel is a mixture of regenerated uranium and plutonium with enriched uranium. Multirecycling of regenerated uranium and plutonium in thermal reactors can provide more effective use of nuclear fuel, reducing the volume of spent nuclear fuel destined for disposal, and reducing the risk of proliferation of nuclear materials. However, recycling of plutonium leads to accumulation of its non fissile isotopes, and recycling of uranium leads to accumulation of 232U. This leads to deterioration of the radiation characteristics of fuel assemblies with fresh fuel. The changes in the isotopic composition of a three types of REMIX fuel during multirecycling in VVER 1000 reactor was calculated. It is shown that for REMIX

A and REMIX A2 fuel more than five recycling are possible without significantly fuel degradation. Equivalent dose from fresh REMIX fuel assembly was calculated depending on the number of cycles and on the time between fuel manufacture and fuel rod loading.

Equivalent dose near the fuel assembly is the important characteristic of radiation danger
of nuclear fuel. The relative contribution of different radio nuclides to the equivalent dose
was determined. Calculation results concerning the accumulation of 232U and non fissile
Pu isotopes depending on the number of recycles are presented.

### Ссылки

1. Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A., Zil’berman B.Ya., Kudryavtsev E.G. Use of regenerated uranium and plutonium in thermal reactors. Atomic Energy. 2005, v. 99, no. 2, pp. 572-576 (in Russian).
2. Nuclear Science. Physics of Plutonium Recycling. Volume VI. Multiple Pu Recycling in Advanced PWRs. NEA OECD. – 2002. ISBN: 92_64_19957_8, p. 9.
3. Dekusar V.M., Kagramanyan V.S., Kalashnikov A.G., Kapranova E.N., Korobitsyn V.E., Puzakov A.Yu. The comparison analyses of BBER REMIX-fuel characteristics when multiple recycling were made. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 109-117 (in Russian).
4. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kudryavtsev E.G., Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A. Neutron-physical characteristics of a VVER core with 100% load of reprocessed uranium and plutonium fuel. Atomic Energy. 2006, v. 101, no. 6, pp. 863-868 (in Russian).
5. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kudryavtsev E.G., Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A., Zil’berman B.Ya. Neutron-physical characteristics of a VVER-1000 core with 100% fuel load consisting of a mixture of recovered uranium and plutonium and enriched uranium. Atomic Energy. 2008, v. 104, no. 4, pp. 257-261 (in Russian).
6. Zil’berman B.Ya., Fedorov Yu.S., Rimcky-Korsakov A.A., Bibichev B.A., Chubarov M.N., Alekseev P.N. Possibility of use of fuel consisting of mixture enriched recover uranium and recover plutonium in VVER-1000 core with 100% fuel load. Atomic Energy. 2012, v. 113, no. 6, pp. 307-314 (in Russian).
7. Androsenko P.A., Alekseev N.I., Bolshagin S.N. MCU-FREE s bankon dannih MDBFREE50. Svidetelstvo o gosudarstvennoy registracii programmi dlya EVM № 2010613800. 2010 (in Russian).
8. Meplan O., Wilson J., Bidaud A., David S., Capellan N., Leniau B., Nuttin A., Havluj F., Vocka R., Chambon R., Michel-Sendis F., Perdu F., Perrot L. MURE, MCNP Utility for Reactor Evolution, User Guide – Version 1.9. Report LPSC 0912. – 2012.
9. X-5 Monte Carlo Team. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code, Version 5. Los Alamos National Laboratory. LA-UR-03-1987. 2003.
10. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Bibichev B.A. Neutron-physical characteristics of a VVER core with 100% load of reprocessed uranium and plutonium fuel. Kurchatov Institute’s report. №32/1-118-405. Мoscow 2005 (in Russian).
11. Forrest R.A. The European Activation System: EASY2007 overview. UKAEA FUS 533.