+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="/pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-12.pdf"
first_page="111"
last_page="118"
udc="621.039.1, 621.039.6"
title="Fuel cycle of Russian nuclear power with involvement of thorium resources and thermonuclear neutron source with Th-blanket"
original_title="Перспективный топливный цикл ядерной энергетики РФ с привлечением незначительного количества тория от термоядерного источника нейтронов с Th-бланкетом"
authors=["KulikovGG", "ShmelevAN", "GeraskinNI", "KulikovEG", "ApseVA"]
tags=["hybrid «FUSION-FISSION» reactor with Th-blanket", "light uranium fraction", "protactinium-231", "multi-isotope uranium fuel", "the stabilization of multiplication properties", "the protection of fissile materials against uncontrolled proliferation"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.12"

+++

The possible role of existing thorium reserves in Russia on engaging thorium in being currently closed (U-Pu)-fuel cycle of nuclear power of the country is considered. The application efficiency of thermonuclear neutron sources with thorium blanket for the economical use of existing thorium reserves is demonstrated.

The aim of the work is to find solutions of such major tasks as the reduction of both front-end and back-end of nuclear fuel cycle and an enhancing its protection against the uncontrolled proliferation of fissile materials by means of the smallest changes in the fuel cycle.

During implementation of the work we analyzed the results obtained earlier by the authors, brought new information on the number of thorium available in Russia and made further assessments.

On the basis of proposal on the inclusion of hybrid reactors with Th-blanket into the future NP for the production of light uranium fraction 232+233+234U, and 231Pa, we obtained the following results:
1. The fuel cycle will shift from fissile 235U to 233U which is more attractive for thermal power reactors.
2. The light uranium fraction is the most “protected” in the uranium component of fuel, and mixed with regenerated uranium will in addition become a low enriched uranium fuel, that will weaken the problem of uncontrolled proliferation of fissile materials.
3. 231Pa doping into the fuel stabilizes its multiplying properties that will allow us to implement long-term fuel residence time and eventually to increase the export potential of all nuclear power technologies.
4. The thorium reserves being near city Krasnoufimsk are enough for operation of large-scale NP of the RF of 70 GW (e.) capacity during more than a quarter century. The general conclusion: the inclusion of a small number of hybrid reactors with Th-blanket into the future NP will allow us substantially to solve its problems, as well as to increase its export potential.

### Ссылки

1. Strategiya razvitiya atomnoj energetiki Rossii v pervoj polovine XXI veka. Osnovnye polozheniya. Moscow, Minatom Rossii Publ., 2000 (in Russian).
2. Marin S.V., Shatalov G.E.Izotopnyj sostav topliva v blankete gibridnogo termoyadernogo reaktora s torievym ciklom. Atomnaya energiya. 1984, v. 56, no.5, pp. 289-291.
3. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. O potenciale gibridnyh (sintez-delenie) narabotchikov topliva dlja jadernyh reaktorov (glubokoe vygoranie, zashhishhennoe toplivo stabilizirovannye razmnozhajushhie svojstva). Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2014. 116 p. (in Russian).
4. Gavrilin V.I., Zubkov L.D., Petrova N.V. Mineral’noe syr’yo. Torij. Spravochnik. Moscow. ZAO «Geoinformmark» Publ., 1998, p. 27 (in Russian).
5. Kac Dzh., Siborg G., Mors L. Himiya aktinidov. Vol. 1. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1991, 525 p. (in Russian).
6. Godoy J.M., Godoy M.L.D.P., Aronne C.C. Application of inductively coupled plasma quadrupole mass spectrometry for the determination of monazite ages by lead isotope ratios. Journal of Brazil Chemical Society. 2007, v. 18.
7. Holmes A. The Pre-Cambrian and associated rocks of the District of Mozambique. Quarterly Journal of Geological Society. 1918, v. 74, pp. 31-98.
8. Avaiable at: http://profbeckman.narod.ru/RH0.files/25_1.pdf.
9. Velihov E.P., Koval’chuk M.V., Azizov Je.A., Ignat’ev V.V., Subbotin S.A., Cibul’skij V.F. Gibridnyj termojadernyj reaktor dlja proizvodstva jadernogo gorjuchego s minimal’nym radioaktivnym zagrjazneniem toplivnogo cikla. VANT, ser. «Termoyadernyj sintez». 2014, v. 4, no. 37, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
10. Gornostaev B.D., Gur’ev V.V., Orlov V.V., Shatalov G.E. Opytno-promyshlennyj gibridnyj narabotchik delyashhegosya topliva. Trudy II Sovetsko-Amerikanskogo Seminara. IAE, Atomizdat Publ.,. 1978, pp. 94-122 (in Russian).