+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:11:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="13"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/01/13.pdf"
first_page="119"
last_page="129"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Calculations and experimental investigation of the irradiation rig with a fuel heater for the BOR-60 reactor"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальные исследования облучательного устройства с твэльным подогревом в реакторе БОР-60"
authors=["VarivtcevAV", "ZhemkovIYu", "BoevAV", "IshuninaOV", "NaboyshchikovYuV", "PoglyadNS", "SharonovaMG"]
tags=["reactor", "irradiation rig", "samples", "fuel pin", "heat rate", "power", "temperature", "thermocouple", "nuclear fuel", "enrichment", "fuel pin", "coolant"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.13"

+++

Tests of perspective materials and new generation reactor core elements are conducted in the BOR-60 reactor. An irradiation rig (IR) with a fuel heater is proposed to be used for reactor tests of different structural materials at the high temperatures. This type of IR has a number of advantages in comparison with IR containing thermo-insulated capsules that is often used now. Calculations and experimental investigations of the IR were performed in the core of the BOR-60 reactor. Results of the special methodical experiment confirmed the possibility of providing the necessary temperature conditions for the samples during irradiation. The neutronics were calculated by MCU-RR code and the thermal hydraulic characteristics were calculated using ANSYS CFX complex. Comparison of calculated temperature values with experimental ones showed that they correlate well – the difference between them is less than experimental error. It means that the used computer codes, models and methods are suitable for such calculations. The calculations and experiments were carried out to see the temperature distribution in the IR with a fuel heater irradiated in the BOR-60 and then put into the dry storage channel. Decay heat rate values inside the IR fuel pins calculated by AFPA code, and the temperatures were calculated using ANSYS CFX. The performed calculations and experiments also showed it possible to remove the IR with a fuel heater from the reactor on the second day of outage, the limited cladding temperatures and required samples temperatures being not exceeded.

### Ссылки

1. Varivtsev A.V., Zhemkov I.Yu., Izhutov A.L., Krasheninnikov Yu.M., Naboishchikov Yu.V., Neustroev V.S., Shamardin V.K. Prolongation of the BOR60 operation. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2015, v.47, no.3, pp. 253–259.
2. Neustroev V.S., Belozerov S.V., Makarov E.I., Ostrovskii Z.E. Effect of tensile and compressive stresses on the radiation swelling and creep strain in austenitic steel KH18N10T. The Physics of Metals and Metallography. 2010, v. 110, no. 4, pp. 394–397.
3. Eremin S.G., Plotnikov A.I., Zhemkov I.Yu. A Rig with a Fuel Heater to irradiate materials in a nuclear reactor. Patent RF No. 2524683, appl. 09.01.2013, published on 10.08.2014, Bulletin № 22 (in Russian).
4. Zhemkov I.Yu. Software for automated calculation of fast reactor characteristics. Proc. Dimitrovgrad. SSC RIAR Publ. 1996, iss. 4, p. 55 (in Russian).
5. Varivtsev A.V., Zhemkov I.Yu. Improved Method for Calculating the Radiation Heat Generation in the BOR  60 Reactor. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2014, v.77, no. 14, pp. 1664–1670.
6. Gomin E., Maiorov L. The MCU Monte Carlo Code for 3D Depletion Calculation. Proceedings of International Conference, September 2730, 1999, v.2. Madrid, Spain.
7. Kolobashkin V.M., Rubtsov P.M., Ruzhansky P.A., Sidorenko V.D. Radiation characteristics of the spent nuclear fuel. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, p. 51 (in Russian).
8. Shalumov A.S., Vanchenko A.S., Fadeev O.A., Bagaev D.V. Introduction to ANSYS. Strength and Thermal Analysis: Manual. Kovrov. KGTA Publ., 2008 (in Russian).