+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:10:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="14"
file="/pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-14.pdf"
first_page="130"
last_page="137"
udc="21.039.534"
title="Effect of impurities content on the heat transfer in the lead coolant"
original_title="Влияние примесей на теплообмен в свинцовом теплоносителе"
authors=["BelozerovVI", "SitdikovER", "VarseevEV"]
tags=["lead coolant", "heavy liquid metal coolant", "thermodynamic activity", "oxygen", "heat transfer", "heat exchange", "the annular channel", "an annular gap"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.14"

+++

This paper presents research results of one of the features of heavy liquid metal technology, in particular the effect of impurities content on the heat exchange process. An analysis of the accumulated theoretical base regarding this problem was done. It shows that earlier researches did not take account of the presence of impurities (especially of oxygen).

To solve such problems in the Russian Federation are built special liquid metal test benches that obtain dependencies Nusselt numbers from Peclet numbers. The experimental results obtained on Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University test bench that refine earlier calculated dependencies are quite controversial. The main contradiction lay in the fact that dependencies of heat exchange in higher oxygen content conditions demonstrates better heat exchange than in the conditions in which the oxygen content is less. However, among the obtained experimental data (coolant heating conditions) there were formulas that satisfactorily describes heat transfer. The paper presents a generalization of these formulas into one, with the inclusion of the values of thermodynamic activity of oxygen into their record structure. To obtain it earlier heat transfer formulas were considered, in particular record structure of these formulas. Then, it was necessary to find constants included in the structure of the desired formula. The most convenient way was to use the graphical method. This method is that the curved lines of heat exchange were compared with each other taking into account the range of variation of thermodynamic activity of oxygen. Using obtained formula, we estimated the effect of different oxygen amounts at various Peclet numbers on heat transfer compared to the “clean” conditions.

### Ссылки

1. Legkih A.Yu., Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.S., Simakov A.A. Ustrojstva dlya obespecheniya za-dannogo kislorodnogo rezhima v pervom konture YaEU s tyazhyolym zhidkometallicheskim teplonositelem [Oxygen regime appliances of the NPS primary loop with a heavy liquid metal coolant].// Materialy XIV Nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii molodyh specialistov OKB «GIDROPRESS» [XIV Science and Technology conference abstracts OKB «GIDROPRESS»], 2012 (in Russian).
2. Beznosov A.V., Novozhilova O.O., Molodtsov A.A. Heat transfer characteristics of core surface models and the steam generator by adjusting the content of impurities in the lead coolant circuit. Atomnaya energiya. 2008., no.2, pp. 74-80 (in Russian).
3. Beznosov A.V., Novozhilova O.O., Savinov S.Y. Experimental research of heat transfer processes and temperature profiles of a flow of heavy liquid metal coolant]. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2008, no. 3, pp. 80-90 (in Rissian).
4. Dwyer O.E., Tu P.S. Unlinear Heat Transfer to Liquid Metals Flowing in Annuli. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 1963, no. 15, pp. 58-68.
5. Zhukov A.V. Heathydraulic calculation of reactors. Part 3: Heat transfer and temperature fields of fuel rods in a regular lattice (single-phase flow: experiment, calculation, methods and formulas). Obninsk. INPE and IPPE Educational and Research Laboratory, ONTI GNTs RF-FEI Publ., 2006 (in Russian).
6. Belozerov V.I., Zhukov A.V., Kuzina Y.A., Grunskiy S.O., Varseev E.V. About some experimental data on the thermodynamic activity of oxygen in heavy coolant. Collection of abstracts “Thermophysics-2010” IPPE. Obninsk, 2010, pp. 69-71 (in Russian).
7. Isachenko V.P., Osipova V.A., Sukomel A.S. Heat transfer. Textbook for universities. 4-th edition, revised and enlarged. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1981. 416 p. (in Russian).
8. Kirillov P.L., Yur’ev Y.S., Bobkov V.P. Heathydraulic calculation manual (nuclear reactors, heat exchangers, steam generators). Ed. Kirillov P.L, 2-nd edition. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990. 360 p. (in Russian).
9. Rassohin N.G. Steam generators of nuclear power plants. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ., 1980. 384 p. (in Russian).
10. Zhukov A.V. Thermal-hydraulic calculation of reactors. Part 2: Convective heat transfer for single-phase flow (classical and modern ideas and solutions). Obninsk, IPPE Publ., 2003. 400 p. (in Russian).
11. Molodcov A.A. Characteristics of heat transfer from the lead coolant in nuclear power equipment at the operational content of impurities. Cand. tech. sci. diss. Nizhnij Novgorod, 2007. 158 p. (in Russian).