+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:09:53+03:00"
issue="2016-01"
issue_name="2016 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="15"
file="pdf/2016/01/2016-01-article-15.pdf"
first_page="138"
last_page="148"
udc="621.039.534"
title="Assurance of corrosion resistance of steels in heavy liquid metal coolants"
original_title="Обеспечение коррозионной стойкости сталей в тяжелых жидкометаллических теплоносителях"
authors=["LegkikhAY", "AskhadullinRS", "SadovnichiyRP"]
tags=["oxygen sensor", "corrosion control", "oxygen content", "mass exchanger", "oxide film", "solubility", "lead", "lead-bismuth", "coolant", "technology"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.1.15"

+++

The article is aimed at the analysis of up-to-date, experimentally-proved methods and equipment to provide conditions in the heavy liquid metal coolants for building up protective oxide coatings on the steel surface and maintaining their integrity during facility operation. Since these protective coatings are based on the oxides of steel elements, then the content of dissolved oxygen in the coolant is one of the key parameters determining their integrity. Analysis of data obtained by the Russian and foreign researchers on the oxygen solubility in liquid lead and lead-bismuth was made. This solubility is critical parameter that makes it possible to determine concentration of oxygen dissolved in heavy liquid metal coolant. There is a review of the latest developments in the area of the equipment for control of oxygen dissolved in the liquid lead and lead-bismuth, that has shown good results in the laboratory studies and has been used in the experimental facilities and test loops for justification of technology and testing components of reactor facilitiers with heavy liquid metal coolants designed in Russia (BREST-OD-300 and SVBR-100). An overview of the main mass exchanger designs (devices for controlled oxygen adding to the coolant) developed by the specialists of JSC “SSC RF – IPPE” during the recent 15 years, is presented. The answer is given to the question concerning practicability of mass exchangers application and their advantages over the gas-phase methods of oxygen adding. Design features of all types of mass exchangers are described. Results of the analysis show that highly effective and reliable devices have been created up to date, that are capable of monitoring and controlling conditions required for assuring corrosion resistance of structural steels in heavy liquid metal coolants in the long-term operation (tens of thousands hours).

### Ссылки

1. Rodigina E.N., Gomel’skii K.Z., Luginina V.F. Zhur. Fiz. Khim. 1961, v.35, p. 1799
2. Alcock C.B. and Belford I.N. Thermodynamics and Solubility of Oxygen in Liquid Metals from E.M.F. Measurements Involving Solid Electrolytes. Trans. Faraday Society, 1964, v. 60, no. 497, pp. 822-835.
3. Ganesan R., Gnanasekaran T., Srinivasa R.S. Diffusivity, Activity and Solubility of Oxygen in Liquid Lead and Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy by Electrochemical Methods, J. Nucl. Mater., 2006, iss. 349, pp. 133-149.
4. Gromov B.F., Orlov Yu.I., Martynov P.N., Gulevsky V.A. Issues of technology of heavy liquid metal coolants (lead-bismuth and lead). Proceedings of Conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies». Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ. 1999, v.1, pp. 92-106 (in Russian).
5. Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and Technologies, OECD/NEA Nuclear Science Committee, 2007. ISBN 978-92-64-99002-9, 693.
6. Gromov B.F., Shmatko B.A. Physical and Chemical Properties of Liquid Lead-Bismuth. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika.1996, no.4, pp. 35-41 (in Russian).
7. Martynov P.N., Chernov M.E., Shelemetyev V.M. Solid electrolyte capsule sensors for oxygen monitoring in liquids and gases. New industrial technologies, TsNILOT. 2004, no. 3, pp. 26-29 (in Russian).
8. Chernov M.E. Datchik kapsul’nogo tipa dlya kontroya kisloroda v konturah YaEU s teplonositelyami svinec i svinec(vismut. Diss. kand. tekhn nauk [Capsule type sensor for oxygen control in NPP circuits with lead and lead-bismuth coolants]. Cand. tech. sci. diss]. Obninsk, 2004. 173 p. (in Russian).
9. Martynov P.N., Chernov M.E., Gulevsky V.A. Tverdoelektrolitnyj datchik koncentracii kisloroda i sposoby ego izgotovleniya [Solid electrolyte sensor of oxygen content and methods of its fabrication]. Patent 2298176 RF, MPK G01N 27/46. 2007 (in Russian).
10. Martynov P.N., Askhadullin R.Sh., Simakov A.A., Lanskikh V.S., Gulevsky G.V. Solid phase technology of oxygen control in heavy liquid metal coolants. New industrial technologies.TsNILOT. 2004, no. 3, pp. 30-34 (in Russian).
11. Martynov P.N., Rachkov V.I., Askhadullin R.Sh., Storozhenko A.N., Ulyanov V.V. Analysis of Modern State of Lead and Lead-Bismuth Coolant Technology. Atomnaya Energiya. 2014, no. 4, pp. 234-240 (in Russian).
12. Legkikh A.Yu., Askhadullin R.Sh., Martynov P.N. Metodika rascheta massoobmennyh apparatov s tverdofaznym istochnikom kisloroda [Technique of calculation of mass exchangers with solid phase oxygen source]. Sb. dokl. Vserossijskoj nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii «Teplofizicheskie eksperimental’nye i raschyotno-teoreticheskie issledovaniya v obosnovanie harakteristik i bezopasnosti yadernyh reaktorov na bystryh nejtronah. (Teplofizika-2011)» [Proceedings of All-Russia Scientific and Technical Conference “Thermal Physics Experimental and Analytical Studies for Justification of Characteristics and Safety of Fast Reactors (Thermal Physics-2011)”]. Obninsk, 19-21 Dec. 2011, pp. 280-290 (in Russian).
13. Simakov A.A., Askhadullin R.Sh., Legkikh A.Yu. Sold phase oxidizers of Pb-Bi and Pb coolants for creation and maintaining of anti-corrosion films on the steels. New industrial technologies. TsNILOT. 2011, no. 1, pp. 33-39 (in Russian).
14. Martynov P.N., Askhadullin R.Sh., Legkikh A.Yu., Simakov A.A., Chaban A.Yu., Sadovnichiy R.P. Avtomatizirovannaja sistema upravlenija termodinamicheskoj aktivnost’ju kisloroda v svincovom i svincovo-vismutovom teplonositeljah [Automatic system of control of oxygen thermodynamic activity in lead and lead-bismuth coolants]. Sb. nauchnyh trudov «Izbrannye trudy FEI» [IPPE Selectas]. Obninsk, JSC «SSC RF-IPPE» Publ. 2011, pp. 188 – 191 (in Russian).