+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2014-01"
issue_name="2014 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/01/04.pdf"
first_page="64"
last_page="76"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Fast reactors and problem of nuclear non-proliferation"
original_title="Быстрые реакторы и проблема ядерного нераспространения"
authors=["AvrorinEN", "ChebeskovAN"]
tags=["nuclear fuel cycle", "non-proliferation of nuclear weapons", "fissile materials", "plutonium", "enriched uranium", "fast reactors", "and thermal reactors"]
rubric = "Сurrentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.04"

+++

The growing number of countries wishing to use nuclear energy, and expansion of the NPPs geography may increase the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation, given that the leaders of some countries may be willing to purchase or develop sensitive nuclear technologies. A certain risk of proliferation by means of nuclear power technologies and materials cannot be excluded completely. In the nuclear fuel cycle there is a large amount of nuclear materials, including fissile ones – many hundreds of thousands of tons. The problem of spent nuclear fuel and plutonium in it, especially for nuclear power newcomers and countries with small nuclear power program also increases the risk of proliferation, including increasing risk of possible actions by the sub-national and terrorist organizations because of spread of nuclear technologies and materials at insufficient measures on their protection in these countries.

For thermal reactors, uranium enrichment is an indispensable element needed to produce the fuel. Forlong-term storage of spent nuclear fuel in thermal reactors open fuel cycle, which is being implemented today, the risk of proliferation due to the weakening of the radiation barrier over time is increasing as well as possible unauthorized removal of the fuel by proliferator state and its theft by criminal and terrorist elements. For start-up of fast reactors with plutonium fuel, uranium enrichment is not required. Long-term storage of spent nuclear fuel is not envisaged in a fast reactor closed fuel cycle. Gradual replacement of thermal reactors by fast reactors, due to the shortage of natural uranium, creates prerequisites for phasing out uranium enrichment. However, countries with small nuclear power program and, therefore having a limited number of nuclear power units will exploit thermal reactors for a long time, which requires uranium enrichment.

Making nuclear weapons from civil plutonium using a simple “gun-type” design is almost impossible because of high neutron background of this kind of plutonium. However, this does not preclude a group of terrorists from attempting to manufacture a primitive nuclear explosive device. In case of start-up of fast reactors using uranium fuel with subsequent transition to plutonium fuel both sensitive technologies, i.e. uranium enrichment and spent fuel reprocessing (with plutonium separation) will be needed and used. In this case, plutonium with little content of higher isotopes will be bred not only in the blanket, but also in the reactor core in much larger quantities.

The paper deals with various technological and institutional approaches to solve the problem of fast reactor blankets as far as provision of of reliable nuclear non-proliferation regime.

### References

1. Sinev N.M., Baturov B.B. Ekonomika atomnoj energetiki. Osnovy tehnologii i ekonomiki yadernogo topliva [Economics of Nuclear Power. Fundamentals of technology and economics of nuclear fuel]. Moskow, Atomizdat Publ. 1980.
2. Silvennoinen P., Vira J. Quantifying Relative Proliferation Risk from Nuclear Fuel Cycles. Prog. In Nucl. En. 1986, vol. 17, no. 3, p. 231.
3. Methodology for the Assessment of Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles. Report of Phase 1B (first part) of the International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles (INPRO). IAEA-TECDOC-1434, December 2004, p. 133.
4. Generation-IV International Forum «A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems», GIF-002-00, USDOE, December 2002.
5. Avrorin E.N., Chebeskov A.N. «Fast reactors and nuclear nonproliferation». International Conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles (FR13), Paris, France, 4-7 March 2013.
6. Available at: http://www.newsru.com (Jun. 30, 2011.)
7. Mark J. Carson. Explosive Properties of Reactor-Grade Plutonium. Science and Global Security 4, pp. 111–128, 1993.
8. Smirnov V.S., Umanskij A.A. Start bystryh reaktorov na obogashchennom urane. [Start fast reactor with enriched uranium.]. Byulleten’ po atomnoj energii. 2008, no. 8, pp. 26–31.
9. Andreeva K.A., Malenkin D.N., Malysheva I.V. Razrabotka i vybor modelej dlya analiza toplivnogo cikla BN pri ispol’zovanii dlya startovoj zagruzki obogashchennogo urana s posleduyushchim perehodom v bridernyj rezhim. XXII Mezhvedomstvennyj seminar «Nejtronno-fizicheskie problemy atomnoj energetiki – Nejtronika-2011» [Development and selection of models for the analysis of fuel cycle using the BN for the starting load of enriched uranium with a subsequent transition to the breeder mode. XXII Interagency Seminar «Neutron-physical problems of nuclear energy – Neutronika-2011»]. Russia, Obninsk, Oct. 25–28 2011. (in Russian)
10. Kessler G. Proliferation-Proof Uranium/Plutonium Fuel Cycles. Safeguards and Non- Proliferation. KIT Scientific Publishing, ISBN 978-3-86644-614-4, p. 372, 2011.
11. Krakowski R.A. Review of Approaches for Quantitative Assessment of the Risks and Resistance to Nuclear Proliferation from the Civilian Nuclear Fuel Cycle. LA-UR-01-0169, January 2001.
12. IAEA Safeguards Glossary. International Nuclear Verification Series no. 3. 2001 Edition.