+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:18:53+03:00"
issue="2014-01"
issue_name="2014 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file="pdf/2014/01/2014-01-article-07.pdf"
first_page="99"
last_page="110"
udc="534-18"
title="Vibroacoustic dynamics of heterogeneous media and NPP structures"
original_title="Виброакустическая динамика гетерогенных сред и конструкций ЯЭУ"
authors=["FedotovskijVS", "VereschaginaTN", "LuninaSV", "IvanovaEA"]
tags=["heterogeneous media", "dispersion media", "dynamic density", "vibroacoustic dynamics", "shell", "bundle of elastic rods"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.07"

+++

Vibroacoustic dynamics of heterogeneous media and systems includes a wide range of research areas. These include the dynamics of multiphase dispersed media, saturated with liquid natural or artificial porous media and composite materials. One of the most important areas is vibroacoustic dynamics of machines and devices and nuclear power plants, in particular. Such parts of a NPP, as the core, consisting of a large number of fuel assemblies, fuel assemblies consisting of bundles of fuel elements, heat exchangers and steam generators with tube bundles, in some dynamic problems should be treated as pseudohomogeneous medium with some effective dynamic properties, reflecting the processes of interaction of the rode-shaped elements with the coolant.

The results of theoretical and experimental studies describing the dynamics of dispersed media and heterogeneous systems from the unified position are given in this paper. Thus, in particular, the dependencies for effective dynamic density and viscosity of liquid translational dispersion media reflecting a relaxation nature sound dispersion in suspensions emulsions and two-phase bubble media were obtained. Resonant dependencies for solid dispersion media (composites) as well as for bundles of elastic rods or tubes in a liquid coolant resulting in significant and vibroacoustic effects of practical importance were also obtained. To illustrate the feasibility and effectiveness of using the concept of effective dynamic properties of heterogeneous media dynamic problems of free oscillations of a shell with a liquid and a bunch of elastic rods as well as gravitational oscillations of a fluid with a free surface in a tank with a bundle of rods are considered.

### References

1. Nigmatulin R.I. Dinamika mnogofaznyh sred. T. 1, 2 [Dynamics of multiphase media. Vols 1, 2].– Moskow, Nauka Publ. 1987.
2. Nikolaevskij V.N., Basniev K.S., Gorbunov A.T., Zotov G.A. Mehanika nasyschennyh poristyh sred [Mechanics of saturated porous media.]. Moskow, Nedra Publ. 1970.
3. Kristensen R.M. Vvedenie v mehaniku kompozitov [Introduction to Mechanics of Composites]. Moskow, Mir Publ. 1982.
4. Artobolevskij I.I., Bobrovnickij Yu.I., Genkin M.D. Vvedenie v akusticheskuyu dinamiku mashin [Introduction to acoustic dynamics of machines]. Moskow, Nauka Publ. 1979.
5. Fedotovskij V.S. O dinamike geterogennyh sred pri vibroakusticheskih vozdejstviyah. Trudy Matematicheskogo centra im. N.I. Lobachevskogo. [On the dynamics of heterogeneous media with vibroacoustic effects. Proceedings of the Mathematical Center of the N.I. Lobachevsky.]. Kazan’, Kazanskoe matematicheskoe obschestvo Publ. 2002, vol. 16. (in Russian)
6. Fedotovskij V.S., Prohorov Yu.P., Vereshchagina T.N. Dinamicheskaya plotnost’ i skorost’ rasprostraneniya voln davleniya v dispersnyh sredah [Dynamic density and velocity of propagation of pressure waves in dispersive media]. Teploenergetika. 2001, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 70–74.
7. Nakoryakov V.E., Pokusaev B.G., Shrejber I.R. Volnovaya dinamika gazo* parozhidkostnyh sred [Wave dynamics of gas-vapor-liquid media]. Moskow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1990.
8. Fedotovskij V.S., Vereshchagina T.N. Nizkochastotnaya rezonansnaya dispersiya zvuka v puzyr’kovyh sredah [Low-frequency resonance of dispersion of sound in bubbly media]. Akusticheskij zhurnal. 2009, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 712–718.
9. Fedotovskij V.S., Vereshchagina T.N. Rezonansnaya dispersiya prodol’nyh voln v dispersnyh kompozitah [Resonance dispersion of longitudinal waves in dispersive composites]. Akusticheskij zhurnal. 2010, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 497–504.
10. Fedotovskij V.S. Koncepciya effektivnyh dinamicheskih svojstv geterogennyh sistem pri vibroakusticheskih vozdejstviyah. Trudy mezhdunarodnoj konferencii «Teplofizicheskie aspekty bezopasnosti WWER». [The concept of effective dynamic properties of heterogeneous systems with vibro-acoustic effects. Proceedings of the Intl. conf. «Thermal WWER safety aspects»]. Obninsk. 1998. vol. 1. pp. 200–215. (in Russian)
11. Fedotovskij V.S., Prohorov Yu.P., Vereshchagina T.N. Gidrodinamicheski svyazannye kolebaniya koncentricheskih obolochek s puchkami sterzhnej ili trub [Hydrodynamically coupled oscillations of concentric shells with bundles of rods or tubes]. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser.: Fizika yadernyh reaktorov. 1998, iss. 1.
12. Fedotovskii V.S., Lunina S.V., Pilshchikova E.A. Natural vibrations of cylindrical shell containing fluid and rods bundles. 11 International Conference on Vibration Problem. ICOVP. / 9-12 September, 2013, Lisbon, Portugal. 2013. ID70.
13. Fedotovskij V.S. Kolebaniya zhidkosti so svobodnoj poverhnost’yu v rezervuare, soderzhashchem puchok sterzhnej [Oscillations of the liquid with a free surface in a tank containing a bundle of rods]. Energetika. 1991, no. 3.