+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="1"
number="09"
file="pdf/2014/01/2014-01-article-09.pdf"
first_page="121"
last_page="135"
udc="621.039.543.6"
title="Modeling services of international nuclear fuel cycle facility for commonwealth of independent states"
original_title="Моделирование работы международного ядерного топливного центра по предоставлению услуг странам ближнего зарубежья"
authors=["DekusarVM", "EgorovAF", "KalashnikovAG", "KorobeynikovVV", "KorobicinVE", "MoseevAL", "MoseevPA"]
tags=["nuclear fuel cycle modelling", "light water reactors", "heavy water reactors", "fast breeder reactors", "synergy", "natural uranium", "optimization", "Global Nuclear Energy", "fuel balance"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.09"

+++

The country starting its own nuclear program faces the the problem of obtaining information about the issues that accompany all stages of the nuclear fuel cycle. A clearly-scheduled long-term national program of nuclear power engineering will allow to determine the requirements for nuclear fuel cycle (NFC) and, accordingly, to identify the most necessary components of the nuclear energy system. Lacking experience in nuclear materials management, countries starting development of nuclear power are forced to rely heavily on the technology supplier. Using the experience of advanced nuclear energy countries by newcomers allows not only to reduce the existing technological gap between them, but also to reduce the uncertainty of start-up costs estimates for developing a NPP of one’s own. Much more difficult is the problem of spent nuclear fuel (SNF), the volume of which during the operation of nuclear power plants is likely to be accumulated in great amount. Solving this problem will have a major impact on both the environmental assessment of the nation’s nuclear fuel cycle and its economy.

In this paper a simulation of an international nuclear fuel cycle center (NFCC) has been done. Russia, Ukraine, Armenia and Belarus (CIS countries) were selected as the NFCC potential participants. The energy system planning code MESSAGE (developed by IAEA) and the software tool NFC CYCLE (developed by IPPE) were chosen for implementing the simulation. To analyze the benefits which Russia and countries participating in the creation of NFCC are going to get two scenarios of nuclear power development in Russia, Ukraine, Armenia and Belarus were calculated: the case of their independent development and the case of their cooperation.

The research results for the selected scenarios showed that:

– starting-up a FR using plutonium obtained by reprocessing SNF of VVER-1000-typereactors allows to optimize currently operated reactors by gradual replacement of thermal reactors by fast ones, thus saving natural uranium;

– joint development of nuclear power plantsby NFCC participant-countries allows to reprocess all SNF, which will amount to about 124,000 tons. This will raise the possibility to avoid construction of storage capacity equal to two storages of Yucca Mountain type.

### References

1. Available at: http://2012.atomexpo.ru/mediafiles/u/files/Present2012/Behar.pdf (Nuclear Energy in France after Fukushima).
2. Available at: http://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/PUB_world_energy_perspec-tive_nuclear_energy_one_year_after_fukushima_2012_WEC. pdf (WorldEnergy Perspective: Nuclear Energy One Year After Fukushima)
3. Adamov E.O., Bol’shov L.A., Lopatkin A.V. e.a. Konceptual’nye polozheniya strategii razvitiya yadernoj energetiki Rossii v perspektive do 2100 g. [Conceptual Development Strategy of Russian nuclear power in the run up to 2100.]. Atomnaya energiya. 2012, vol. 112, no. 6, pp. 319–330.
4. Rachkov V.I. Atomnaya energetika kak vazhnejshij faktor ustojchivogo razvitiya Rossii v XXI v. [Nuclear energy as an important factor for sustainable development of Russia in XXI century]. Energosberezhenie i vodopodgotovka. 2006, no. 6, pp. 2–4.
5. Hlopkov A. Angarskij proekt: Obogashchenie vs. Rasprostranenie. [Angarsk project: Enriching vs. Proliferation]. Indeks bezopasnosti. 2008, no.2 (85).
6. Yudin Yu. Mnogostoronnie podhody k yadernomu toplivnomu ciklu. Analiz sushchestvuyushchih predlozhenij. YuNIDIR. [Multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle. Analysis of the existing proposals. UNIDIR]. Available at: http://www.unidir.org/pdf/ouvrages/pdf-2-978-92-9045-195-2-en.pdf
7. Request by the Russian Federation regarding its Initiative to Establish a Reserve of Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) for the Supply of LEU to the IAEA for its Member States. GOV/2009/81. 27 November 2009.
8. Available at: http://www.nuclear.ru/rus/press/oyatrao/2131663/ (V Missisipi obsuzhdaetsya vozmozhnost’ sozdaniya centra po obrashcheniyu s OYaT) [In Mississippi discussed the possibility of establishing a center for SNF management].
9. Lebedev A.E. Mezhdunarodnyj centr po obogashcheniyu urana – celi, zadachi, uspehi, perspektivy. Doklad na Mezhdunarodnom forume ATOMEKSPO 2011. 6–8 iyunya 2011 g. [International Uranium Enrichment Center - goals, objectives, results and perspectives. Report of the International Forum ATOMEXPO 2011. 6-8 June 2011]. Available at: http:/ /2011.atomehpo.ru/mediafiles/u/files/Pre-sent2011/Lebedev_A.E._rus.pdf
10. Available at: http://www.nuclear.ru/rus/press/oyatrao/2123252/ (Verhovnaya Rada prinyala zakonoproekt o sooruzhenii centralizovannogo hranilishcha OYaT) [Ukrainian Parliament adopted a bill on the construction of a centralized repository of spent nuclear fuel]
11. Available at: http://www.nuclear.ru/rus/press/nuclearenergy/2125066/ (Sroki vvoda v ekspluataciyu novoj AES v Armenii pereneseny na 2019 – 2020 gg.) [The commissioning of a new NPP in Armenia postponed to 2019 – 2020 years.]
12. Available at: www.iiasa.ac.at/(IIASA, MESSAGE – Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact).
13. Dekusar V.M., Kagramanyan V.S., Kalashnikov A.G. e.a. Razrabotka matematicheskoj modeli toplivnogo cikla atomnoj energetiki, sostoyashchej iz teplovyh i bystryh reaktorov. [Development of mathematical model for nuclear power fuel cycle consisting of thermal and fast reactors.]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2010, no. 4, pp. 119–132
14. Rachkov V.I., Poplavskij V.M., Tsibulya A.M., Bagdasarov Yu.E. e.a. Koncepciya perspektivnogo energobloka s bystrym natrievym reaktorom BN-1200. [Concept of prospective of power unit with fast neutron reactor BN-1200.]. Atomnaya energiya. 2010, vol. 108, no. 4, pp. 201–205.
15. Kuznecov I.A., Poplavskij V.M. Bezopasnost’ AES s reaktorami na bystryh nejtronah [Security NPP with fast reactors]. Moskow, IzdAt Publ. 2012, 632 p.
16. Energeticheskaya strategiya Rossii na period do 2030 g. Prilozhenie no. 4. Utverzhdena rasporyazheniem Pravitel’stvom RF ot 13.11.2009 g. no.1715-r. [Russia’s Energy Strategy until 2030.Application number 4. Approved by order of the Government of the Russian Federation dated 13.11.2009 no.1715-r.] (in Russian)
17. Uranium 2009: Resources, Production and Demand. OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency, OECD 2008 NEA N 6345.
18. Egorov A.F., Korobejnikov V.V., Poplavskaya E.V., Fesenko G.A. Ocenka chuvstvitel’nosti modeli razvitiya yadernoj energetiki Rossii k vozmozhnym izmeneniyam klyuchevyh ekonomicheskih parametrov [Estimation of sensitivity for development model of Russian nuclear power to possible changes in key economic parameters]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 53–61.