+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="pdf/2014/01/2014-01-article-10.pdf"
first_page="136"
last_page="148"
udc="001.38"
title="About knowledge management in nuclear organizations"
original_title="О сохранении знаний в организациях атомной отрасли"
authors=["VereshchaginaTN"]
tags=["knowledge management", "intellectual results", "explicit knowledge", "implicit knowledge", "knowledge dissemination", "knowledge transfer and preservation"]
rubric = "training"
rubric_name = "Personnel training"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.10"

+++

In present-day world knowledge is considered as an intellectual asset or a resource. And it is the only resource which cannot be quickly reproduced by competitors.

Growing attention to nuclear knowledge management is a result of nuclear power renaissance in the world. The nuclear knowledge management has become a priority issue of IAEA member-states activity in the last decade. The purpose of the knowledge management is providing the agency’s staff with the necessary knowledge in the right place at the right time.

The Rosatom State Corporation’s program contains three functional blocks. They are:
– scientific communities management,
– scientific and technical information (content) management,
– intellectual rightsmanagement.

One of problems of scientific and technical communities management is preservation of crucial knowledge. Nine pilot projects on preservation of crucial knowledge were realized by the Corporation in 2012 as a form of multimedia modules (three of them in SSC RF-IPPE).

The Regulations and systematic recommendations on preservation of crucial knowledge in institutions concerned were developed.

The important role for transfer and preservation of knowledge in IPPE belongs to postgraduate study. 40-50 graduate students are currently trained. There is an immediate face-to-face communication between a teacher and a young specialist as well knowledge translation.

The main task for scientific and technical information content management is to provide safety and to make formalized knowledge (i.e. scientific and technical information, accumulated in the institution and information from external sources) accessible for users. Intellectual rights management targets in IPPE are realized by the patent department.

For the last two years the quantity of protected intellectual rights has considerably increased, registration of know-how has been organized, and registration of the computer programs has begun. The further task of SSC RF-IPPE in this area is increasing of revenue by means of licenses sale. The Rosatom State Corporation set ambitious targets of annual multiple increase in profit at the expense of licenses.

The first steps of IPPE in knowledge management have shown expediency of combining traditional and innovative methods of work, necessity of creative approaches to all the targets of knowledge management. It is necessary to analyze existing methods and means, to define the most acceptable of them for each institution and to constantly improve them. Only in this case information necessary for the staff will be available in time, and a free knowledge exchange between them will be free and easy.

### References

1. Labockij V.V. Upravlenie znaniyami (tehnologii, metody i sredstva predstavleniya, izvlecheniya i izmereniya znanij) [Knowledge management (technology, methods and means of representation, knowledge extraction and measurement)]. Minsk, Sovremennaya shkola Publ. 2006, 392 p.
2. Gavrilova T.A., Chervinskaya, K.R. Izvlechenie i strukturirovanie znanij dlya ekspertnyh sistem [Extracting and structuring of knowledge for expert systems]. Moskow, Radio i svyaz’ Publ. 1992, 200 p.
3. Kulopulos Т., Frappaolo К. Smart things to know about Knowledge Management. Capstone Publishing Limited, Oxford Centre for Innovation. Oxford OX2 0JX, United Kingdom. 1999, 120 p.
4. Perelygina I.A. Upravlenie znaniyami kak faktor povysheniya korporativnoj kul’tury organizacii [Knowledge management as a factor in increasing the corporate culture of the organization]. Iniciativy XXI veka. 2010, no. 1, pp. 28–32.
5. Kryshtafovich A.N. Upravlenie znaniyami – perspektivnoe napravlenie menedzhmenta [Knowledge management – a perspective direction of management]. Menedzhment v Rossii i za rubezhom. 2003, no. 1, pp. 42–51.
6. De Grosbois J., Kumar V. The role of knowledge management in NPP organizational performance. International Journal of Nuclear Knowledge Management (IJNKM). 2009, vol. 3, issue 2, pp. 137–156.
7. Risk Management of Knowledge Loss in Nuclear Industry Organizations. IAEA Publications. STI/PUB/1248. 2006, 31 p.
8. The Nuclear Power Industry’s Ageing Workforce: Transfer of Knowledge to the Next Generation. IAEA-TECDOC-1399. 2004, 101 p.
9. Planning and Execution of Knowledge Management Assist Missions for Nuclear Organizations. IAEA-TECDOC-1586. 2008. 61 p.
10. Evaluation of Human Resource Needs for a New Nuclear Power Plant: Armenian Case. IAEA-TECDOC-1656. 2011, 99 p.
11. Managing Nuclear Knowledge, Pocket Reference for Executives. IAEA. 2012, 16 p.
12. Knowledge Management for Nuclear Research and Development Organizations. IAEA-TECDOC-1675. 2012, 59 p.
13. The Impact of Knowledge Management Practices on NPP Organizational Performance – Results of a Global Survey. IAEA-TECDOC-1711. 2013, 131 p.