+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2014-01"
issue_name="2014 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="pdf/2014/01/2014-01-article-12.pdf"
first_page="160"
last_page="171"
udc="621.039.534.6"
title="Calculation and experimental research in support of mass exchangers for providing specific oxygen regime in heavy liquid metal coolants (Pb, Pb Bi)"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальные исследования в обоснование массообменных аппаратов для обеспечения заданного кислородного режима в тяжелых жидкометаллических теплоносителях (Pb, Pb-Bi)"
authors=["AskhadullinRS", "MartynovPN", "RachkovVI", "LegkikhAY"]
tags=["thermodynamic activity", "oxygen", "solubility", "lead", "lead-bismuth", "oxide", "coolant", "mass exchanger", "solid-phase method"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.12"

+++

At this paper approaches and results of computational and experimental studies in support of mass exchangers design with solid oxygen source is described. The performance of mass exchangers with the in-built pump and pneumatic type (discrete operating principle) is studied. Experimental studies of the performance mass exchangers was carried on a facility with a non-isothermal circulating coolant Pb-Bi (SSC RF-IPPE). The calculations were performed using empirical temperature dependences of oxygen solubility and dissolution rate coefficients of lead oxide in the Pb-Bi. Dissolution of lead oxide in the mass exchange apparatus was seen as a process of physical dissolution of the solid. The studies obtained dependence thermodynamic activity of oxygen at the outlet of the mass exchanger and its performance on the regime. It is shown that the calculation results are in good agreement with experimental data. Executed work confirms the possibility of estimation performance mass-exchangers, which is extremely important in creating mass-exchangers for a particular object, for example, the nuclear power plant, in order to select an optimal design and parameters of its work.

### References

1. Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.Sh., Legkih A.Yu. e.a. Avtomatizirovannaya sistema upravleniya termodinamicheskoj aktivnost’yu kisloroda v svincovom i svincovo-vismutovom teplonositelyah. Sbornik nauchnyh trudov [Automated control system for thermodynamic activity of oxygen in lead and lead-bismuth coolant. Proceedings]. Obninsk: SSC RF-IPPE, 2011, pp. 188–191. (in Russian)
2. Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.Sh., Simakov A.A. e.a. Tverdofaznaya tehnologiya regulirovaniya kisloroda v tyazhelyh zhidkometallicheskih teplonositelyah [Solid-phase technology of management by oxygen in heavy liquid-metal coolants]. Novye promyshlennye tehnologii. 2004, no. 3, pp. 30-34.
3. Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.Sh., Simakov A.A., e. a. Sposob podderzhaniya korrozionnoj stojkosti stal’nogo cirkulyacionnogo kontura so svinecsoderzhashchim teplonositelem i massoobmennoe ustrojstvo dlya ego realizacii (varianty) [A method of maintaining the corrosion resistance of the steel circulation loop with lead-containing coolant and mass transfer device for its implementation (options)]. Patent RF, no. 2246561, MPK C23F 11/00, 2005.
4. Gromov B.F., Shmatko B.A. Fiziko-himicheskie svojstva rasplavov svinec-vismut [Physico-chemical properties of lead-bismuth melts]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 1996, no. 4, pp. 35–41.
5. Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and Technologies, OECD/NEA Nuclear Science Committee, 2007. ISBN 978-92-64-99002-9. – 693 p.
6. Legkih A.Yu., Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.Sh.. Raschet massoobmennyh apparatov dlya obespecheniya zadannogo kislorodnogo rezhima v tyazhelom zhidkometallicheskom teplonositele [Calculation of the mass-transfer apparatus for a given oxygen regime in a heavy liquid metal coolant]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 1, pp. 80–91.
7. Aksel’rud D.A., Molchanov A.D. Rastvoreniya tverdyh veshchestv [Dissolve solids]. Moskow, Himiya Publ. 1977, 272 p.
8. Aerov M.E., Todes O.M., Narinskij D.A. Apparaty so stacionarnym zernistym sloem: Gidravlicheskie i teplovye osnovy raboty [Apparatus with stationary granular layer: Hydraulic and thermal basics of working]. Leningrad, Himiya Publ. 1979, 176 p.
9. Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.Sh., Legkih A.Yu., Simakov A.A. Eksperimental’nye issledovaniya usovershenstvovannogo massoobmennogo apparata s tverdofaznym istochnikom kisloroda primenitel’no k tehnologii teplonositelya 44,5%Pb-55,5%Bi [Experimental researches of advanced mass exchanger with solid-phase oxygen source in respect to technology of coolant 44,5%Pb-55,5%Bi]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2009, no. 4, pp. 161–168.
10. Beznosov A.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Rachkov V.I. Tyazhyolye zhidkometallicheskie teplonositeli v atomnoj energetike [Heavy liquid metal coolants in nuclear power]. Moskow, IzdAt Publ. 2007, 433 p.