+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2014-01"
issue_name="2014 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="15"
file="/pdf/2014/01/2014-01-article-15.pdf"
first_page="204"
last_page="214"
udc="621.039.51.17"
title="Verification of neutron data for main reactor materials from ROSFOND neutron data library on intergral experiments"
original_title="Верификация нейтронных данных основных реакторных материалов из библиотеки РОСФОНД на интегральных экспериментах"
authors=["KoscheevVN", "ManturovGN", "NikolaevMN", "TsiboulyaAM"]
tags=["evaluation nuclear data files", "ROSFOND", "verification", "benchmark-model"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.15"

+++

Recently almost all the available in the world evaluated neutron data libraries, as ENDF/B-VII in the USA, JEFF-3.1 in EU, JENDL-4 in Japan , CENDL-4 in China and RUSFOND in Russia have been essentially updated. These libraries are currently are being strongly tested for its preferable use in applications. As a rule, testing of neutron data libraries is widely performed through calculations of criticality for specially selected benchmark models from ICSBEP Handbook. Other sources of information for neutron data testing are also available. They are: one-group cross-sections obtained by weighting with standard fission spectra, and cross-sections for neutron removal to the sub-threshold region for a reaction used as a detector: fission into 238U and 237Np or (n, p)reaction to27Al. The results of neutron data testing for the main fuel reactor materials 238U, 237U, 239Pu along with traditional criticality calculations of selected benchmark models are presented in the paper.

At the first stage the neutron data for 235U, 238U, 239Pu (resonance integrals, one-group cross-sections, cross-sections for neutron removal to the sub-threshold region) fromfour modern data libraries ENDF/B-VII.1, JEFF-3.1.1, JENDL-4.0 and RUSFOND were compared with experimental data. At the second stage of verification the neutron data were verified in criticality calculations of selected sets of benchmark experiments from ICSBEP Handbook. The benchmark experiments selection criteria were: benchmark model simplicity, hydrogen to fuel ratio representativeness, description completeness. Benchmark models were selected both for fast and thermal neutron spectra regions. The list of benchmark models includes 62 configurations with high enriched uranium and 49 models with low enriched uranium fuel, and 102 models with plutonium fuel as well.

The performed verification demonstrates good concordance of the accepted evaluations for 235U, 238U and 239Pu in RUSFOND-2010 data library with results of wide range experiments. The procedure of successive neutron data testing through integral micro-experiments and further verification of data in criticality calculations of selected benchmark configurations from ICSBEP Handbook allows to estimatethe quality of neutron data for its further use in scientific and design calculations of nuclear energy installations.

It is proposed to extend the list of experiments and attract benchmark experiments from international IRPhE Handbook of reactor physics experiments, including experiments performed in IPPE on fast physical stand BFS for further RUSFOND data verification.

### References

1. Zabrodskaya S.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Koscheev V.N. e.a. ROSFOND – Rossijskaya nacional’naya biblioteka ocenennyh nejtronnyh dannyh [ROSFOND – The National Library of evaluated neutron data]. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser.: Yadernye konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2, pp. 3
2. The JEFF-3.1.1 Nuclear Data Library, JEFF Report 22, NEA No. 6807, OECD 2009.
3. Shibata K. e.a. JENDL-4.0: A new library for nuclear science and engineering. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. 2011, vol. 48, pp. 1–30.
4. Chadwick M.B. e.a. ENDF/B-VII.1 Nuclear data for science and technology: cross sections, covariances, fission product yields and decay data. Nuclear Data Sheets. 2011, vol. 112, 12.
5. Mughabghab S.F. Atlas of Neutron Resonances: Thermal Cross Sections and Resonance Parameters. Elsevier Publisher, Amsterdam, 2006.
6. Mannhart W. Progress Report on Nuclear Data Research in the Federal Republic of Germany. NEA/ NSC/DOC(99)10, INDC(Ger)-045, 1999.
7. Gorbacheva L.V., Manturov G.N., Tsibulya A.M. Ocenka rezul’tatov izmerenij srednih sechenij deleniya 235U, 238U i 239Pu na spektrah nejtronov deleniya 235U i 252Cf [Estimation of measurement results for 235U, 238U и 239Pu fission cross-sections using 235U & 252Cf fission neutron spectra]. Atomnaya energiya. 1980, vol. 49, iss. 4, pp. 256-259.
8. Bondarenko I.I., Kovalyov V.P. Fizicheskie izmereniya na nejtronah deleniya s konvertorami [Physical measurements of fission neutrons with converters]. IAEA Seminar Physics of Fast and Intermediate Reactors, Vienna 1961, v. 2, p. 159.
9. Dulin V.A. e.a. Opredelenie secheniya uvoda pod porog deleniya 238U iz eksperimentov po propuskaniyu. [Determination of removal cross-section under 238U fission threshold from transmission experiments]. Atomnaya energiya, 1985, vol. 59, iss. 2, pp. 116–119.
10. International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments, OECD/NEA, NEA/ NSC/DOC(95)03 (September 2009 Edition).
11. Golovko Yu.E., Ivanova T.T., Nikolaev M.N., Rozhihin E.V., Cibulya A.M. Soglasovannyj nabor kriticheskih eksperimentov dlya verifikacii nejtronnyh konstant urana-235 [A consistent set of critical experiments to verify neutron constants for 235U]. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser.: Yadernye konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2, pp. 110–125.
12. Golovko Yu.E., Rozhihin E.V., Tsibulya A.M., Koscheev V.N. Vybor soglasovannogo nabora kriticheskih eksperimentov iz ICSBEP Handbook i ocenka tochnosti raschetnogo predskazaniya kritichnosti. Doklad na Mezhdunarodnoj konferencii po yadernoj bezopasnosti (ICNC’07). [Selection of a consistent set of critical experiments from the ICSBEP Handbook and verification of criticality prediction calculations. Proceedings of the International Conference on Nuclear Criticality Safety (ICNC’07)]. Sankt-Petersburg, 2007.
13. Golovko Yu.E., Rozhihin E.V., Cibulya A.M., Koscheev V.N. Ocenka tochnosti raschetnogo predskazaniya kritichnosti na osnove eksperimentov iz spravochnika ICSBEP Handbook. / Doklad na Mezhdunarodnoj konferencii po fizike reaktorov (PHYSOR’08), Shvejcariya [Verification of criticality prediction calculations based on experiments from the ICSBEP Handbook. Proceedings of the International Conference on Physics of Reactors (PHYSOR’08), Switzerland].2008.
14. McFarlane R.E. e.a. NJOY97.0 Code System for Produsing Pointwise and Multigroup Neutron and Photon Sections from ENDF/B Data. RSIC Peripheral Shielding Routine Collection, PSR-368.
15. Forrest B.B., Booth T.E. e.a. MCNP-A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code, Version 5,Overview and Theory. Vol. I. LA-UR-03-1987, LANL, (2003).