+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-29T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2014-01"
issue_name="2014 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="17"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/01/17.pdf"
first_page="224"
last_page="233"
udc="621.039.526"
title="The influence of impurities of the first loop on the activity of sodium in BN reactors"
original_title="Влияние примесей натрия на активность в первом контуре реакторов типа БН"
authors=["TikleevaKV", "PeregudovAA", "ZabrodskaiaSV", "KoscheevVN", "ShpakovaSE"]
tags=["influence", "impurity", "activity", "sodium reactor", "accuracy", "calculations", "programs", "constant data"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.17"

+++

The purpose of this work was to analyze accuracy of calculations on various programs and activityconstants for activation products of bismuth, potassium and argon impurities in the primary circuit sodium coolant of a high power BN-type reactor .

Calculations were made on the basis of the codes MMKKENO, TRIGEX. 04, КАС-КАД (KASKAD) and КАТРИН (KATRIN), using modern files libraries of evaluated data in 28 and 299 group representations: JEFF311, TENDL2011, JENDL4. 0 and RUSFOND and also the group constants systemsБНАБ-93 (ABBN-93).

While calculating Po210 and Bi210m, the calculation results show great difference in case activation cross-sections have different estimations according to the libraries data. This situation with constants is urgent because the current experience of dealing with radioactive substances shows that polluted open surfaces of equipment are potential sources of internal exposure. The leading role belongs to inhalation exposure as a result of radioactive substances transition from polluted surfaces in the air of workrooms. Repairing heat exchangers, pumps and other equipment, which werein operation in the primary circuit sodium, the presence of Po210 on the surface can cause radiation exposure of personnel.

Potassium and argon in the primary circuit sodium form gas-products Ar41 and Ar39, which enter the reactor gas reactor system and workrooms. Data analysis of cross-section for these isotopes showed that there is no great discrepancy between the results.

The results obtained on activity of radioactive isotopes mentioned above with different programs MMKKENO, TRIGEX, КАСКАД and КАТРИН are within ~ 3–11%.

### References

1. Voloshchenko A.M., Shvecov A.V. KASKAD-1.5 – programma dlya resheniya uravneniya perenosa nejtronov, fotonov i zaryazhennogo izlucheniya v dvumernyh geometriyah. Sbornik tezisov dokladov VII Rossijskoj nauchnoj konferencii «Zashchita ot ioniziruyushchih izluchenij yaderno-tehnicheskih ustanovok» [KASKAD-1.5 – The program for the neutron transport equation, photons and charged radiation in two-dimensional geometries. Proceedings of the VII Russian Conference on Protection from Ionizing Radiation From Nuclear Facilities] – Obninsk, Sept.22–25, 1998. (in Russian)
2. KATRIN-2.5 – programma dlya resheniya uravneniya perenosa nejtronov, fotonov i zaryazhennogo izlucheniya metodom diskretnyh ordinat v trehmernoj geometrii: Otchet o NIR / IPM im. M.V. Keldysha RAN: Rukovoditel’ Voloshchenko A.M. – Inv. № 7-27-2004. – M., 2004, obnovlen 2009. – Otvetstvennyj ispolnitel’ Voloshchenko A.M. [KATRIN-2.5 code to solve multigroup transport equations for neutrons, photons and charged particles by discrete ordinate method in 3D geometries: Research Project Report. Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics (Russian Academy of Sciences), no. 7-27-2004. Мoskow, 2004, updated 2009]. (in Russian)
3. Blyskavka A.A., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N. e.a. Programmnyj kompleks CONSYST//MMKKENO dlya rascheta yadernyh reaktorov metodom Monte-Karlo v mnogogruppovom priblizhenii s indikatrisami rasseyaniya v Rn-priblizhenii. Preprint SSC RF-IPPE – 2887. [CONSYST//MMKKENO software package for calculating nuclear reactors by Monte-Carlo method in a multi-group approximation with scattering indicatrixes in Рn- approximation: IPPE Preprint-2887] – Obninsk, 2001. (in Russian)
4. Seregin A.S., Kislicina T.S., Tsibulya A.M. Annotaciya kompleksa programm TRIGEX.04: Preprint SSC RF-IPPE – 2846. [Description of the TRIGEX.04 code package: IPPE Preprint-2846] Obninsk, 2000. (in Russian)
5. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Programma podgotovki konstant CONSYST. Opisanie primeneniya: Preprint SSC RF-IPPE-2828. [CONSYST code for neutron constants preparation. Scope statement: IPPE Preprint -2828] Obninsk, 2000. (in Russian)
6. Zabrodskaya S.V. e.a. ROSFOND – rossijskaya nacional’naya biblioteka ocenyonnyh nejtronnyh dannyh. [ROSFOND Russian Evaluated Neutron Data Library.]. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2.
7. Available at: http://www.nndc.bnl.gov/exfor/endf00.jsp
8. Nikolaev M.N., Koscheev V.N., Zabrodskaya S.V. e.a. Biblioteka sechenij nejtronnyh reakcij v sisteme konstantnogo obespecheniya BNAB-93. [Neutron reaction cross-section library in the BNAB-93 constant system.] Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser.: Yadernye konstanty. 1999, iss. 2.
9. Razrabotka versii vzaimosoglasovannoj sistemy kodov rascheta zashchity RU BN na baze kodov DORT-TORT, KASKAD i KATRIN s razrabotkoj servisnyh programm: Annotacionnyj otchet. [Development of a mutually consistent code system for calculation fast neutron reactor protection based on the DORT-TORT, KASKAD and KATRIN codes: Executive Summary]. SSC RF-IPPE, no. 29-17/490. Obninsk, 2007. (in Russian)
10. Orsi R. BOT3P Version 5.1: A Pre/Post-Processor System for Transport Analysis, ENEA report FIS-P9H6-014, Italy, 2006
11. Voloshchenko A.M., Gukov S.V., Shvecov A.V. ARVES-2.5 – kompleks programm, obsluzhivayushchih fajl makrokonstant v formate FMAC-M, dlya resheniya mnogogruppovogo uravneniya perenosa. Instrukciya dlya pol’zovatelya. Otchet IPM im. M.V. Keldysha RAN. [ARVES-2.5 software package maintaining the microconstant file in the FMAC-M format to solve the multi-group transport equation. User manual. Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics (Russian Academy of Sciences)]. no.7-24-004. Moskow, 2004. (in Russian)