+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file="pdf/2017/04/2017-04-article-02.pdf"
first_page="17"
last_page="26"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Regulation of the temperature in the ampoule channel with natural circulation of coolant"
original_title="Регулирование температуры в ампульном канале с естественной циркуляцией теплоносителя"
authors=["OsipovaTA", "StarkovVA", "UzikovVA"]
tags=["research reactor SM", "ampoule channel with natural circulation", "research results", "temperature regimes of irradiation", "power of energy release"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.02"

+++

It is shown by calculations that for the proposed hydraulic circuit, it is possible to expand significantly the possibilities of the temperature regime regulation of the samples in the ampoule channel with coolant natural circulation. The proposed hydraulic circuit consists in changing the geometry of the circulation loop by creating a bypass section for the heat removal that is formed in the upper part above the flow restrictor, that improves the regulation of the temperature conditions compared to regulation only by changing the heat conductivity of the gas gap of the channel body (pressure or gas composition). The ampoule channel is irradiated in the reflector cell of the reactor SM-3. The test conditions, the scheme and thermal-hydraulic model of ampoule channel for the code RELAP5/MOD3.2 are presented. The influence of the bypass cooling circuit on the temperature conditions while samples irradiation in the ampoule channel has been studied in this work. The bypass flow rate is changed by varying the size of the flow area of the hole in the flow limiter. The variants of filling the gas gap of the channel housing with helium and a mixture of helium and nitrogen are considered. The calculation showed that the power removed by bypass line can be up to 40% of the total heat capacity of the channel. When using helium as a gas in the channel gap, regulation of the samples temperature is carried out in a wider range (200 – 330°C) than when using a gas mixture with a lower thermal conductivity (279 – 330°C). The main change in temperature occurs when the gap area in the flow limiter is less then (0.2-0.3) cm2. Further increase of the gap area in the flow limiter does not lead to a significant change in the coolant temperature around the samples.

### References

1. Zvir A.I., Sviatkin M.N., Petelin A.L. Opyt ekspluatacii vysokopotochnogo issledovatel’skogo reactora SM. [The trial of exploitation of the high flux research reactor SM]. Materialy XI ezhegodnogo Rossijskogo soveschanija «Bezopasnost’ issledovatel’skih yadernyh ustanovok» [Materials of the XIth annual Russian counsel «The safety of research nuclear facilities»]. Dimitrovgrad, 2009, pp. 38-44 (in Russian).
2. Arkhangelsky N., Izhutov A. Capabilities and Capacities of RIAR Research Reactors. Presentation at IAEA, Vienna, Austria (2013).
3. Bychkov A. RIAR Capabilities and Support of Research and Development of Generation IV Innovative Reactors. Presentation at Joint ICTP/IAEA School on Physics and Technology of Fast Reactors Systems, Italy (2009).
4. Samsonov B.V., Tsykanov V.A. Reaktornye metody materialovedeniya. [Reactor Materials methods]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1991. 248 p. (in Russian).
5. Tsykanov V.A., Samsonov B. V. Tekhnika oblucheniya materialov v reaktorakh s vysokim neytronnym potokom. [Materials irradiation technique in reactors with a high neutron flux]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1973. 264p. (in Russian).
6. Osipova T.A., Uzikov V.A., Palachov P.S., Makin R.S. Obosnovanie vozmozhnosti ispolzovaniya ampulnogo kanala s estestvennoj cirkulyaciej dlya vnutrireaktornyh ispytanij. [Justification of the possibility of using the ampule channel with natural circulation for in-pile tests]. VANT. Ser. Fizika yadernykh reaktorov. 2015, iss. 5, pp. 72-77 (in Russian).
7. Osipova T.A., Valishin M.F., Uzikov V.A., Palachyov P.S. Issledovanie dostizhimyh temperaturnyh rezhimov v ampulnom kanale s estestvennoj cirkulyaciej. [The research of the achievable temperature modes in the ampoule channel with a natural circulation]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2015, no. 4, pp. 72-78 (in Russian).
8. Osipova T.A. Primeneniye ampul’nogo kanala s yestestvennoy tsirkulyatsiyey dlya vnutrireaktornykh ispytaniy. [The application of an ampoule channel with natural circulation for in-core testing]. XVIII Mezhdunarodnaya telekommunikatsionnaya konferentsiya molodykh uchenykh i studentov «Molodezh’ i nauka». [XVIIIth International Telecommunication Conference of Young Scientists and Students «Youth and Science»]. Moscow, 2014. Available at: http://mn.mephi.ru/articles/1110 (accessed 1 Aug 2015) (in Russian).
9. Uzikov V.A., Osipova T.A. Metodika inzhenernykh raschyotov parametrov ampul’nogo kanala s yestestvennoy tsirkulyatsiyey. [Technique of engineering calculations of parameters of ampoule channel with natural circulation]. Innovatsii v atomnoy energetike: sb. dokladov konferentsii molodykh spetsialistov. [Innovations in Nuclear Power Engineering: Sat. Reports of the Conference of Young Specialists]. Moscow. JSC «NIKIET» Publ., 2015, pp. 323-333 (in Russian).
10. Osipova T.A. Eksperimental’nyye reaktornyye ustroystva dlya oblucheniya konstruktsion-nykh materialov vodo-vodyanykh reaktorov. [Experimental reactor devices for irradiating structural materials of water-cooled reactors]. XIX Mezhdunarodnaya telekommunikatsionnaya konferentsiya molodykh uchenykh i studentov «Molodezh’ i nauka». [XIXth International Telecommunication Conference of Young Scientists and Students «Youth and Science»]. Moscow, 2015. Available at: http://mn.mephi.ru/articles/1335 (accessed 11 Nov 2016) (in Russian).
11. Osipova T.A., Uzikov V.A. Inzhenernaya metodika optimizatsii parametrov ampul’nogo kanala s yestestvennoy tsirkulyatsiyey. [Engineering technique for optimizing the ampoule channel parameters with natural circulation]. Vserossiyskaya molodezhnaya konferentsiya «Nauchnyye issledovaniya i tekhnologicheskiye razrabotki v obespecheniye razvitiya yadernykh tekh1nologiy novogo pokoleniya». [Russian Youth Conference «Scientific Research and Technological Development for the Development of Nuclear Technologies of the New Generation»]. Dimitrovgrad. JSC «SSC NIIAR» Publ., 2016, pp. 48-51 (in Russian).
12. Seredkin S.V., Palachev P.S., Marikhin N.YU., Fedotova D.A., Uzikov V.A., Osipova T.A., Gataullina G.D. Razrabotka metodiki issledovaniya korrozionnogo rastreskivaniya pod napryazheniyem splava INCONEL 718 pri obluchenii v reaktore SM. [Methodical Study of Stress Corrosion Cracking of Inconel 718 Alloy in the SM-3 Reactor]. Report on the basic research works carried out in 2013 – Dimitrovgrad. JSC «SSC NIIAR» Publ., 2014. 31 p. (in Russian).
13. Fletcher C.D. and Schultz R.R. RELAP5/MOD3 Code Manual, User’s Guidelines. NUREG/CR-5535, INEL-95/0174, June 1995, v.5, rev.1.
14. RELAP5/MOD3, v. 1 – 7. Code Manual. NUREG/CR-5535 INEL-95/0174, 1995.
15. Gataullina G. D., Uzikov V. A., Osipova T. A. Rol’ mezh”yacheechnoj estestvennoj cirkulyacii v reaktorah bassejnovogo tipa [The Role of Inter-Cell Natural Circulation in the Pool-Type Reactors]. Atomnaya energiya. 2012, v. 113, iss. 4, pp. 205-209 (in Russian).
16. Osipova T.A., Uzikov V.A., Makin R.S. Razlichnye podhody k modelirovaniyu teploperedachi izlucheniem v gazovom zazore v kode RELAP5/MOD3.2. [Different approachs to modeling radiation heat transfer in the gas gap using RELAP5/MOD3.2. code]. Izvestiya Samarskogo nauchnogo centra RAN. 2014, v. 15, iss. 6, pp. 147-150 (in Russian).
17. Mikheev M.A., Mikheeva I.M. Osnovy teploperedachi. [Fundamentals of heat transfer]. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1977. 344 p. (in Russian).
18. Kutateladze S.S. Teploperedacha i gidrodinamicheskoe soprotivlenie: Spravochnoe posobie. [Heat transfer and hydrodynamic resistance: A reference book]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990. 367 p. (in Russian).
19. Kirillov P.L., Yriev.Y.S., Bobkov V.P. Spravochnik po teplogidravlicheskim raschetam (Yadernye reaktory, teploobmenniki, parogeneratory). [Reference book on thermohydraulic calculations (Nuclear reactors, Heat-exchange Units, Steam-generating Units)]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990. 360 p. (in Russian).
20. Chirkin V.S. Teplofizicheskie svojstva materialov yadernoj tekhniki. [Thermal properties of materials of nuclear technology]. Reference book. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968 (in Russian).