+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file="pdf/2017/04/2017-04-article-04.pdf"
first_page="38"
last_page="49"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Solution of neutron transport multigroup equations system in subcritical systems"
original_title="Решение системы многогрупповых уравнений переноса нейтронов в подкритических системах"
authors=["ShamaninIV", "BedenkoSV", "NesterovVN", "LutsikIO", "PretsAA"]
tags=["neutron transport", "diffusion equation", "subcritical systems", "multigroup approximation"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.04"

+++

The iteration process of the neutron-transport equation solution in diffuse 28-group approximation was implemented. A PuO2-fueled thermoelectric generator providing thermal and electric power for space vehicles was researched as a system.

The search for more true function of neutron distribution for zero iteration is considered an important simulation stage, which allows increasing accuracy of the neutron transport equation solution by the method of iteration in diffuse multigroup approximation. Moreover it makes it possible to improve neutron-physical characteristics of the researched system, when there is some small increase in the number of computed iterations.

It should be noted that the required functions can be computed using such specialized programs as SOURCE-4C and NEDIS-2m. These programs allow calculating the intensity and spectrum of the neutrons in (a,n) reactions and at spontaneous fission, preparing files with the output data in the form usable for solving the neutron transport equation in the programs of MCU, MCNP and Scale type.

In the work the neutrons intensity and spectrum (the neutron distribution function at zero iteration) for the system of multigroup neutron transport equations were obtained using approximation of a wide range of calculated and experimental data (with the error of not more than 5%) with high accuracy.

Spectral and integral neutron-physical characteristics of the system were obtained as the result of the multigroup equations system solution, and the resulting calculation data were verified. The applied approach is considered economical from the point of view of computational cost (as the value of neutron flux density fractions agree at the 3rd iteration) and expenditures connected with nuclear data bank storage. This approach can be used in tasks of nuclear and radiation safety. The computations were performed using the system of group constants BNAB-78,-93 and other available libraries of evaluated nuclear data: ROSFOND, BROND, BNAB, EXFOR and ENDSF.

High accuracy results agree with the results obtained in ANISN, MCNP (JENDL-3.2.) and SCALE-4.3(KENO-V.a, ENDF/B-V).

### References

1. Bell D., Glesston S. Teoriya yadernykh reaktorov [Theory of nuclear reactors]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974, 489 p. (in Russian).
2. Abagyan L.P., Bazazyants N.O., Nikolayev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Gruppovyye konstanty dlya rascheta reaktorov i zashchity [Group constants for the calculation of reactors and protection]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1981, 139 p. (in Russian).
3. Vlaskin G.N., Khomyakov Y.S., Bulanenko V.I. Neutron Yield of the Reaction (α,n) on Thick Targets Comprised of Light Elements. Atomic Energy. 2015, v. 117, no. 5, pp. 357-365.
4. Wilson W.B., Perry R.T., Charlton W.S. SOURCES 4С: A Сode for Calculating (α,n), Spontaneous Fission, and Delayed Neutron Sources and Spectra. Los Alamos National Laboratory report LA UR-02-1839, 2002.
5. Bulanenko V.I. Neutron yield of (α,n) reaction on oxygen. Soviet Atomic Energy, 1980, v. 47, no. 1, pp. 531-534.
6. Vukolov V.A., Chukreev F.E. Neutron yield for chemical compounds of actinides. Soviet Atomic Energy. 1987, vol. 62, no 4, pp. 271-276.
7. Ziegler J.F., Ziegler M.D., Biersack J.P. SRIM – The Stopping and Ranges of Ions in Matter. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B. 2010, v. 268, pp. 1818-1823.
8. Hansen L.F., Anderson J.D., McClure J.W. The (α,n)cross section on 17O and 18O between 5 and 12,5 MeV. Nuclear Physics A. 1967, v. 98, no. 1, pp. 23-32.
9. Bair J.K., J. Gomez del Campo. Neutron Yields from Alpha-Particle Bombardment. Nuclear Science and Engineering.1979, v. 71, pp. 18-28.
10. D. West, A.C. Sherwood. Mesurments of Thick-Target (α,n) Yields from Light Elements. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 1982, v. 9, pp. 551-577.
11. Heaton R., Lee H., Skensved P., Robertson B.C. Neutron Production from Thick-Target (α,n) Reactions. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A. 1989, v. 276, no 3, pp. 529-538.
12. Murata T., Shibata K. Evaluation of The (α,n) Reaction Nuclear Data for Light Nuclei. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2002, v. 39, pp. 76-79.
13. Shamanin I.V., Bulanenko V.I., Bedenko S.V. Pole neytronnogo izlucheniya obluchennogo keramicheskogo yadernogo topliva razlichnykh tipov [Neutron Radiation Field of the Irradiated Ceramic Nuclear Fuel of Different Types]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2010, v. 2, pp. 97-103 (in Russian).
14. Gorshkov V.A. Neutron Yield form the (a,n) Reaction in Be, B, C, O, F, Mg, Al, Si, and Granite Irradiation with Polonium α-particles. Soviet Atomic Energy. 1962, v. 13, pp. 123-135.
15. Herold T.R. Neutron spectrum of 238PuO2. Nuclear Application. 1968, v. 4, pp. 19-22.
16. Anderson М.E., Neff R.A. Neutron emission rates and energy spectra of two 238Pu Power Sources. Nuclear Application. 1969, v.7, pp. 62.
17. Taherzadeh M. Neutron Yield form the (α,n) Reaction in the Isotope 18O. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 1971, v. 44, pp.190-193.
18. Taherzadeh M., Gingo Peter J. Neutron radiation characteristics of plutonium dioxide fuel. Nuclear Technology. 1972, v. 15, no 3, pp. 396-410.
19. Arkhipov V.A., Gorshkov G.V., Grebenskii B.S. Neutron radiation of 238PuO2 containing different amounts of 18O. Soviet Atomic Energy. 1972, v. 32, no. 4, pp. 347-348.
20. Bair J., Butler H. Neutron Yield form a Small High Purity 238PuO2 Source. Nuclear Technology. 1973, v.19, pp. 202.
21. Anderson M.E. Neutron energy spectra of 238Pu-18O (α,n) source-unmoderated and polyethylene moderated. Health Physics. 1980, v. 39, no. 3, pp. 537-542.
22. Voropayev A.I., Van’kov A.A., Vozyakov V.V.. Gruppovyye neytronnyye secheniya deleniya i radiatsionnogo zakhvata transaktinidov [Group neutron cross sections for fission and radiation capture of transactinides]. VANT. Ser. Yadernyye konstanty. 1979, v. 3, no. 34, pp. 34-60 (in Russian).
23. Golovatskiy A.V., Nesterov V.N., Shamanin I.V. Organizatsiya iteratsionnogo protsessa pri chislennom vosstanovlenii spektra neytronov v razmnozhayushchey sisteme s grafitovym zamedlitelem [Organization of the iterative process in the numerical reconstruction of the neutron spectrum in a multiplying system with a graphite retarder]. Russian Physics Journal. 2010, v. 53, no. 11, pp. 10-14 (in Russian).