+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/04/05.pdf"
first_page="50"
last_page="60"
udc="621.039.548"
title="Measurement of the spent fuel rod cladding temperature during the in pile testing at 500 – 900°c"
original_title="Измерение температуры оболочки твэла с выгоревшим топливом в диапазоне 500 – 900°c в реакторном эксперименте"
authors=["DreganovOI", "ShulimovVN", "KiselevaIV", "AlekseevAV"]
tags=["lab-scale facility", "experimental fuel rod", "electrically heated fuel rod dummy", "cladding", "spacer grid", "thermocouple", "hot junction", "temperature", "heating rate", "reactor MIR", "loss-of-oolant accident (LOCA)"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.05"

+++

The paper focuses on the measurement of the VVER-1000 spent fuel rod cladding temperature in the course of the in-pile testing performed at 500-900°С in the MIR reactor channel to obtain data on the fuel rods behavior under the parameters typical or the maximal design-basis loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA). If the objective is to study the cladding deformation of spent fuel rod, it is very important to take measurements of cladding temperature with no any impact (thermal, mechanical etc.) on it in the region of the maximum straining.

To conduct rapid experiments in the MIR reactor channels where irradiation testing of fuel rods is performed in the vapor-gas medium, a cladding temperature measurement system was developed so that the cladding was not exposed to external influences in the region of the maximum straining.

The thermocouple hot junction is pressed to the cladding when installed into the spacer grid to avoid the external influence on the cladding. A lab-scale facility was used to study the thermometric characteristic of the thermocouple junction unit that is related to the influence of the spacer grid on the unit thermal state. The laboratory-scale experiment with the use of dummy fuel rod instrumented with the internal electrical heater made it possible to obtain error correction system for readings of thermocouples which were installed into the spacer grids to take temperature recordings in the region of the maximum straining of fuel cladding.

The procedure was applied in the in-pile experiments to study the fuel rod cladding deformation. The obtained experimental data were used to estimate the cladding temperature for the high burnup fuel rod to conduct irradiation testing in the MIR reactor under the conditions of maximum design-basis LOCA in the VVER-1000 reactor.

These data were in good agreement with the post-irradiation examination data of fuel rods and were confirmed with the calculation modelling.

### References

1. Alekseev A.V., Burukin A.V., Izhutov A.L., Kalygin V.V., Kiseleva I.V., Ovchinnikov V.A., Shulimov V.N. Methods to test VVER fuel in the MIR reactor under transient and accidental conditions. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2007, no. 3, pp.83-91 (in Russian).
2. Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Malkov A.P., Shulimov V.N. Studying of the VVER fuel behavior under the control rod ejection accident conditions. In-pile test method and procedure. Sbornik Trudov NIIAR [RIAR Proceedings], 2006, iss. 1, pp. 23-32 (in Russian).
3. Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Ovchinnikov V.A., Shulimov V.N. VVER-1000 fuel testing method in the MIR reactor under the control rod ejection accident conditions. Atomnaya Energiya, 2006, v.101, iss. 6, pp. 427-431 (in Russian).
4. Alekseev A.V., Burukin A.V., Izhutov A.L., Kalygin V.V., Kiseleva I.V., Ovchinnikov V.A., Shulimov V.N. Programs and Methods for Testing in the MIR research Reactor Fuel Elements of Water-Cooled Reactors under Conditions Simulating Transient and Emergency Ones. Atomnaya Energiya, 2012 (September), v. 113, iss. 3, pp.146-150 (in Russian).
5. Goryachev A.V., Makhin V.M., Kiseleva I.V. , Shulimov V.N. Integral In-Pile Experiments with VVER-440 and VVER-1000 Multielement Fuel Test Rigs under the LOCA Conditions. Compilation of Experimental Data from a series of Tests. VANT. Ser. Fisika Yadernykh Reaktorov, 2004, iss. 2, pp. 29-38 (in Russian).
6. Alekseev A.V., Goryachev A.V., Kalygin V.V., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N. VVER-1000 Fuel Irradiation in the MIR Reactor under Conditions Simulating II and III Stage of Design Basis “Large Leak” Accident. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2009, no. 4, pp. 132-136 (in Russian).
7. Salatov A.V., Kumachev A.V., Nechaeva O.A., Novikov V.V., Fedotov P.V., Alekseev A.V., Goryachev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N., Bykov M.A., Makhin V.M., Zaytsev S.I., Zakutaev M.O., Lyutov K.V., Pylev S.S., Tebin V.V., Shchepetilnikov E.Yu., Gusev A.S., Pimenov Yu.V. Experimental and Computational Studies of VVER Fuel Behavior under LOCA Conditions (MIR-LOCA/60 Test). VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy, 2013, iss. 1 (74), pp. 26-38 (in Russian).
8. Goryachev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Makhin V.M. , Shulimov V.N. Integral In-Pile Experiments with VVER-440 and VVER-1000 Multielement Fuel Test Rigs under the LOCA Conditions. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2004, no. 3, pp. 50-58 (in Russian).
9. Shulimov V.N., Kiseleva I.V. Experiment- and Calculation-Based Estimation of Fuel in the Course of Rapid In-Pile «Large Break Loss of Coolant Accident-2» (BT-2). «Experimental Data Analysis and Verification of Computer Codes». Proc. of Workshop Abstracts. Sosnovy Bor, October 4-8, 2004. Nauchno-Issledovatelsky Tekhnologichesky Institut im. A.P.Aleksandrova [Research Institute of Technology n.a. A.P.Alexandrov], pp. 98-100 (in Russian).
10. Askeljung P., Flygare J., Minghetti D. Studsvik Nuclear AB, SE-611 82, Nykoping, Sweden NRC LOCA testing program at Studsvik, recent results on high burnup fuel (TopFuel 2012-a0117).
11. Kekkonen L. LOCA testing at Halden. In-pile results from the VVER LOCA test IFA-650.6 (HWR-870). EHPG Meeting, 18-23 May 2008, Loen.
12. Research Reactors of RIAR and their Experimental Capabilities under Scientific Editorship of Prof. V.A. Tsykanov. Dimitrovgrad. NIIAR Publ., 1991, 103 p. (in Russian).
13. Shulimov V.N., Dreganov O.I., Izhutov A.L., Kisseleva I.V., Gorychev F.V., Alexeev A.V., Fedotov P.V., Kumachev A.V., Kuznetsov V.I., Novikov V.V., Salatov A.V., Sypchenko M.V., Pimenov Yu.V. LOCA test with high burnup VVER fuel in MIR reactor. TopFuel conference Proceedings Part II, Zurich, Switzerland, 13-17 September 2015. ISBN 978-92-95064-23-2, www.topfuel 2015.org., pp. 391-400.
14. Izhutov A.L., Dreganov O.I., Kisseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N. Researches of VVER high burn-up fuel behavior under LOCA conditions. Joint Halden Reactor Project NEA Working Group on Fuel safety LOCA Workshop. Aix-en Provence, France, May 20-21, 2015.
15. Alekseev A.V., Goryachev A.V., Dreganov O.I., Izhutov A.L., Kireeva L.V., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N., Kuznetsov V.I., Novikov V.V., Salatov A.V., Fedotov P.V. Investigation of VVER-1000 fuel rods behavior under LOCA. MIR-LOCA/45 and MIR-LOCA/69 experiments. Proc. of JSC «TVEL» Scientific Conference «Yadernoye toplivo novogo pokoleniya dlya AES» [New Generation Nuclear Fuel for NPPs]. Moscow, 16-17 November 2016, p.38 (in Russian).
16. Goncharov A.A., Kuznetsov V.I., Kumachev A.V., Nechaeva O.A., Novikov V.V., Salatov A.V., Fedotov P.V. Experiments and calculation to study high-burnup VVER fuel behavior under design-basis accidents. Proc. of JSC «TVEL» Scientific Conference «Yadernoye toplivo novogo pokoleniya dlya AES» [New Generation Nuclear Fuel for NPPs]. Moscow, 16-17 November 2016, p. 36. (in Russian).
17. Alekseev A.V., Goryachev A.V., Dreganov O.I, Kireeva L.V., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N. Study of VVER-1000 Fuel Rod Behavior under LOCA Conditions. Sbornik Trudov NIIAR [RIAR Proceedings]. Dimitrovgrad. AO «GNTs NIIAR» [JSC «SSC RIAR»], 2017, iss. 1, pp. 12-20. ISBN 978-5-94831-154-8 (in Russian).
18. Alekseev A.V., Goryachev A.V., Dreganov O.I, Kireeva L.V., Kiseleva I.V., and Shulimov V.N. Study of high-burnup VVER-1000 Fuel Rod Behavior under LOCA Conditions. Experiment-LOCA/72. Proc. of the Xth International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety Assurance of NPP with VVER», 16-19 May, 2017. Russia. Podolsk, pp. 102-103. ISBN 978-94883-146-6 (in Russian).
19. Spasskov V.P., Shumsky A.M., Semishkin V.P. In-Pile Testing of the VVER Core Emergency Performance in the Loop Test Facility PVP-2 in the MIR reactor. Proc. of Int. Conf. «Thermal Physics-98», Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE,1998, v. 2, pp. 42-51 (in Russian).
20. Alekseev A.V., Goryachev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N. Procedure and results of testing a VVER-1000 FA fragment in the MIR reactor channel under the maximum design-basis accident (stages II and III). Atomnaya Energiya, 2007(November), v.103, iss. 5, pp. 286-291 (in Russian)