+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:18:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="06"
file="pdf/2017/04/2017-04-article-06.pdf"
first_page="61"
last_page="71"
udc="621.039.543.6"
title="Elaboration of approach to nuclear energy systems assessment by criterion of sustainable development"
original_title="Разработка подхода к оценке ядерных энергетических систем по критерию устойчивого развития"
authors=["UsanovVI", "KviatkovskiiSA", "AndrianovAA"]
tags=["sustainable development", "fast reactors", "closed nuclear fuel cycle", "nuclear energy system"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.06"

+++

The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate an approach to the assessment of nuclear energy systems based on the integral indicator of sustainability and the comparative evaluation of various nuclear energy systems with a different set of nuclear reactors and fuel cycle facilities. The proposed approach to the assessment of nuclear energy systems is based on the methodology developed within the IAEA INPRO project.

Advance of the nuclear energy systems to sustainability is characterized by the achievement of certain key developments in six subject areas of the assessment: economy, safety, resources, waste management, non-proliferation and public support. Achieving of certain key developments is considered as a measure to achieving the goals of sustainable development at several time intervals until the end of century.

It is shown that the nuclear energy systems based on a once-trough nuclear fuel cycle with thermal reactors and uranium-oxide fuel does not reach the highest ratings by integral indicator of sustainable development, even in the case of isolation of spent nuclear fuel in the geological formations. The gradual replacement of a part of thermal reactors by fast reactors and the closure of the nuclear fuel cycle leads to a more complete comply with requirements of sustainable development in many areas of the assessment and accordingly to the radical enhancement of sustainability of a two component nuclear energy system. Also, the nuclear energy system with thermal reactors and once-through nuclear fuel cycle can reach high ratings in case of closely cooperates on the front-end and back-end of the nuclear fuel cycle with the countries, which developing fast reactors and closed nuclear fuel cycle.

### References

1. International Atomic Energy Agency, Guidance for the Application of an Assessment Methodology for Innovative Nuclear Energy Systems. INPRO Manual. IAEA-TECDOC-1575, Rev. 1, Vienna (2008). Available at http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE_1575_web.pdf
2. GEN-IV International Forum, Annual Report 2015, p.135.
3. ROADMAPS Collaborative Project Web Page. Available at https://www.iaea.org/INPRO/CPs/ROADMAPS/index.html
4. Egorov A.F., Korobeynikov V.V., Poplavskaya E.V., Fesenko G.A. Assessment of Russia Nuclear Power Development Model Sensitivity Analysis to Possible Changes of Selected Economic Parameters. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 53-61 (in Russian).
5. Egorov A.F., Korobeynikov V.V., Poplavskaya E.V., Fesenko G.A.; Computational studies of global nuclear energy development under the assumption of the worlds heterogeneous development. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 3, pp. 88-95 (in Rissian).
6. Klimenko A.V., Mironovich V.L. System and economic optimization problems of NNPs and its ideology. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 1, pp. 149-157 (in Russian).
7. Stephen M. Goldberg and Robert Rosner, Nuclear Reactors: Generation to Generation. American Academy of Arts & Sciences, 2011, pp. 6-11. Available at http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/nuclear-fuel-cycle/nuclear-power-reactors/advanced-nuclear-power-reactors.aspx
8. OECD, Technology Roadmap Update for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems, 2014, 14 p.
9. IRSN, Overview of Generation IV (Gen IV) Reactor Designs. Safety and Radiological Protection Considerations, 2012, pp. 13-15.
10. White Book of Nuclear Power. Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy. General editor E.O. Adamov, Moscow 2001, 128 p. (in Russian).
11. The twocomponent nuclear energy system with thermal and fast reactors in the closed nuclear fuel cycle. Ed. by of RAS Acad. N. Ponomarev-Stepnoy. Moscow. Technosphere Publ., 2016. 253 p. (in Russian).
12. Kagramanyan V., Usanov V., Kalashnikov A., Kvyatkovskii S. Medium-term nuclear industry prospects associated with synergistic LWR/SFR system and related closed nuclear fuel cycle, Global 2015 September 20-24, 2015. Paris (France), Paper 5115.
13. Le Mer J., Garzenne C., Lemasson D. EDF research scenarios for closing the Plutonium cycle. International conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Safe technologies and Sustainable Scenarios, FR13, Paris, 4-7 March (2013).
14. Kviatkovskii S., Usanov V., Andrianov A. Assessment of a nuclear energy system based on the integral indicator of sustainable development. Proceedings of International Conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17), 26-29 June 2017, Yekaterinburg, RF, Paper ID IAEA-CN245-194.
15. Andrianov A., Kuptsov I., Murogov V. Towards sustainable nuclear power development. ATW: International Journal for Nuclear Power. 2014, v. 59, iss. 5, pp. 287-293.
16. Kuznetsov V., Fesenko G., Andrianov A., Kuptsov I. INPRO activities on development of advanced tools to support judgement aggregation for comparative evaluation of nuclear energy systems. Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations, 2014, v. 2014, Article ID 910162, 15 pages, 2014. DOI:10.1155/2014/910162
17. Schwenk-Ferrero A., Andrianov A. Nuclear Waste Management Decision-Making Support with MCDA, Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations. 2017, v. 2017, article ID 9029406, 20 pages, DOI: 10.1155/2017/9029406
18. Schwenk-Ferrero A., Andrianov A. Comparison and Screening of Nuclear Fuel Cycle Options in View of Sustainable Performance and Waste Management. Sustainability. 2017, v. 9 (9), p. 1623.
19. Kuznetsov V., Fesenko G., Schwenk-Ferrero A., Andrianov A., Kuptsov I. Innovative Nuclear Energy Systems: State-of-the Art Survey on Evaluation and Aggregation Judgment Measures Applied to Performance Comparison. Energies, 2015, v. 8, pp. 3679-3719.
20. Andrianov A.A., Kuptsov I.S., Svetlichny L.I., Utianskaya T.V. Performance and sustainability assessment of nuclear energy deployment scenarios with fast reactors: advanced tools and application. Proceedings of International Conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17), 26-29 June 2017, Yekaterinburg, RF, Paper ID IAEA-CN245-007.