+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file="/pdf/2017/04/2017-04-article-08.pdf"
first_page="83"
last_page="93"
udc="621.311.25:621.039.620.193.1"
title="Flow-accelerated corrosion rate and residual life time estimation for the components of pipeline systems at nuclear power plants based on control data"
original_title="Расчет скорости коррозии и остаточного ресурса элементов трубопроводов АЭС по данным контроля "
authors=["BaranenkoVI", "GulinaOM", "SalnikovNL"]
tags=["flow-accelerated corrosion", "wall thickness control data", "FAC rate estimation", "bends", "welding", "minimal admissible wall thickness", "residual life time"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.08"

+++

There is large number of nondestructive operation control data at each NPP units. To prove reliable operation and optimal both volume and period of control it is necessary to develop computer codes, regulatory and modified procedures to estimate FAC rate and residual life time [1, 2, 3]. The paper deals with different approaches to FAC rate estimation based on control data. Some kinds of piping elements from different types of NPP units are researching in this paper. FAC process peculiarities at piping straight parts and welding of NPP units with PWR and BWR are discussed in previous paper [4]. Corrosion products deposit on interior surface of piping leads to residual life time formally to arise. However, real state of piping wall thickness is unknown as well as initial one. Researching performed directs to improve FAC rate estimation procedure on the base of control data to adapt calculation results to real situation according «rational conservatism».

The main idea of paper is to estimate FAC rate in piping elements by the same manner. Besides, there are suggested some procedures to estimate correcting coefficients taking into account technological tolerance on manufacturing, element geometry, corrosion products deposits influence on both initial and minimal wall thickness, based on control data and standards.

Researching performed show the efficiency of procedures developed for welding. For homogeneous sample of bends there was performed analysis of both known and developed procedures. As result the ranking was fulfilled according to criterion «conservatism of residual service life estimation».

Application of correcting coefficients leads to more high conservatism in service life estimation in with using of nominal wall thickness, and result demands on element geometry and size and also on type of NPP unit.

### References

1. Baranenko V.I., Gashenko V.A., Shchederkina T.E. Universal’ny diagnostichesky priznak dlya ocenki iznosa truboprovodov v okoloshovnyh zonah (opyt Zaporozhskoj AES). [A general diagnostic feature for evaluating the wear rate of pipelines in the weld-affected zones (field experience at the Zaporozhskaya NPP]. Zavodskaya laboratoriya. Diagnostika materialov. 1998, v. 64, no. 2, pp. 56-58 (in Russian).
2. Gulina O.M., Salnikov N.L., Baranenko V.I. Razrabotka normativnoy dokumentatsii dlya upravleniya resursom oborudovaniya AES v usloviyah erozionno-korrozionnogo iznosa. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2013, no. 3, pp. 273-278 (in Russian).
3. Recommendation for Effective Flow-Accelerated Corrosion Program (NSAC-202L-R4). EPRI/ 3002000563. Technical Report, November 2013. EPRI. 94 p.
4. Baranenko V.I., Gulina O.M., Salnikov N.L., Murzina O.E. Obosnovanie raschetov skorosti EKI i ostatochnogo resursa truboprovodov AES po dannym ekspluatatsionnogo kontrolya (Substantiation of FAC rate and service life estimation under operation control data). Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 55-65 (in Russian).
5. Baranenko V.I., Yanchenko Yu. A., Gulina O.M., Dokukin D.A. O raschete skorosti erozionno-korrozionnogo iznosa I ostatochnogo resursa truboprovodov AES. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2010, no. 2, pp. 55-63 (in Russian).
6. Baranenko V.I., Yanchenko Yu. A., Gulina O.M., Tarasova O.S. Ekspluatatsionny kontrol’ truboprovodov, podverzhennyh erozionno-korrozionnomu iznosu. Teploenergetika. 2009, no. 5, pp. 20-33 (in Russian).
7. Nakhalov V.A. Nadezhnost’ gibov trub teploenergrticheskih ustanovok. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 183 p. (in Russian).
8. ОSТ 24.321.26-74, ОSТ 24.321.28-74, ТU 14-3-460-75. Geometricheskie kharakteristiki gibov. Utonenie rastyanutoy chasti gibov. Predel’nye otkloneniya po tolshchine stenok truboprovodov. Moscow. Gosstandart Publ., 1975, 8 p. (in Russian).
9. Korhonen R., Hietanen O. Erosion-corrosion of parallel feed water discharge lines at the Loviisa VVER-440. Proceed. of Specialists Meeting Organized by the Inter. Atomic Energy Agency. 19-22 Sept. 1994. IAEA Vienna held in Kiev. Ukraina, Kiev, 1994, pp. 73-89 (in Russian).
10. ОSТ 24.125.30-89 – ОSТ 24.125.57-89. Detali I sborochnye edinitsy iz staley perlitnogo klassa dlya truboprovodov AES D=16-720 mm. Tipy, konstruktsya i razmery. Leningrad. Gosstandart Publ., 1989, 155 p.(in Russian).
11. RD EO 1.1.2.11.0571-2015 «Normy dopuskaemyh tolschin stenok elementov truboprovodov iz uglerodistyh ctaley pri erozionno-korrosionnom iznose» [Norms of admissible wall thickness for carbon steel piping under flow accelerated corrosion]. Мoscow. VNIIAES Publ. 2012, 210 p. (in Russian).
12. Case of ASME Requirements for Analytical Evaluation of Pipe Wall Thinning. Section XI, Division 1. Case N-597-2. November 10, 2003. 13 p.
13. Rushchak M., Kaplan J., Kadechka P. Complex Approach to the Lifetime Evaluation of WWER Secondary Piping Due to Erosion-Corrosion. Proc. of the IAEA Specialists Meeting on Erosion/Corrosion of Nuclear Power Plant Components. Russian Federation, Vladimir. Sept. 13-16, 1996, pp. 24-30 (in Russian).