+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="09"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/04/09.pdf"
first_page="94"
last_page="105"
udc="621.039.587"
title="Development of seismic protection system for design extension conditions"
original_title="Система антисейсмической защиты для предупреждения запроектных аварий"
authors=["GalievII", "ChernyaevAN", "BibikSV"]
tags=["Seismic Protection System", "maximum estimated earthquake", "shutdown", "seismic station", "safety", "VVER", "data transmission"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.09"

+++

Development of SPS DEC is proposed in the article in order to improve operational safety of nuclear power plants located in areas with unfavorable seismic conditions. The idea is to create a network of seismic stations located at a certain distance from the plant and provided with the data transmission system. If seismic sensors detect ground motion with a magnitude greater than a certain set point, seismic stations transmit a signal over the radio channels that the setpoint is exceeded before the seismic wave reaches the nuclear power plant. This allows to transfer the reactor to a subcritical state before the destruction of equipment and buildings begins. Ensuring reliable secure communication is achieved by the simultaneous use of three radio channels organized in accordance with the TETRA, WiMAx and LTE standards and technologies and by use of the necessary cryptography, authentication and data protection against distortion measures. The analysis of the optimality of the seismic stations remoteness from NPPs and their number is carried out in the work with two SS placing options: radial around the NPP and towards the place with the highest probability of occurrence of an earthquake. The scheme of multilevel majority signal processing is proposed, which allows to exclude spurious activations of the system. The proposed system is an expedient solution that does not require high costs for implementation and allows to significantly improving the safety of the nuclear power plant by preventing beyond design basis accidents caused by earthquakes with intensity higher than at maximum estimated earthquake.

### References

1. Novikova A.A. The natural disaster in Japan and its consequences. Moscow. INION RAN Publ., 2013, 40 p. (in Russian).
2. Hano J. Das japanische Desaster: Fukusima und die Folgen. Freiburg. Herder Verlag, 2011, 160 p.
3. NP-031-01. The design standards of earthquake-resistant nuclear power plants. Moscow. Gosatomnadzor Rossii Publ., 2001, 33 p. (in Russian).
4. Heaton T.H. A model for a seismic computerized alert network. Science, 1985, v. 228, рр. 987–990.
5. Shustov V., Basseri S., Shustov S. Тesting of a new line of seismic base isolators. Final Project Report to NSF, Award no 0618183, La Crescenta, CA, 2007, 35 p.
6. Chivilev S.V. Standard TETRA. Possibilities and Advantages. Elektrotehnicheskie i informacionnye kompleksy i sistemy. 2009, v. 5, no 2, рр. 50-55. (in Russian).
7. Sjuvatkin V.S., Esipenko V.I., Kovalev I.P., Suhorebrov V.G. Wireless technology: theoretical foundations, standards, application. Saint Petersburg. BHV-Peterburg Publ., 2005, 356 р. (in Russian).
8. Tihvinskij V.O., Terent’ev S.V., Yurchuk A.B. LTE Mobile Networks: Technology and Architecture. Moscow. Eko-Trendz Publ., 2010, 284 p. (in Russian).
9. Roslyakov A.V. Virtual private networks. Fundamentals of construction and application. Moscow. Eko-Trendz Publ., 2006, 304p. (in Russian).
10. Ljasin D.N., San’kov S.G. Methods and means of protection of computer information.Volgograd. VolgGTU Publ., 2005, 127 p. (in Russian).
11. Gorishnij V.A, Volkov V.V., Chernecov V.B., Borisenko L.N. Assessment of the engineering environment in an emergency situation. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2009, 83 p. (in Russian).
12. SP 151.13330.2012. Inzhenernye izyskanija dlya razmeshheniya, proektirovaniya i stroitel’stva AES. Chast’ I. Inzhenernye izyskaniya dlya razrabotki predproektnoj dokumentacii (vybor punkta i vybor ploschadki razmeshheniya AEeS). [Engineering surveys for the location, design and construction of nuclear power plants. Part I. engineering surveys for the development of pre-project documentation (choice of point and choice of NPP site)]. Moscow. Gosstroj Publ., 2013 (in Russian).
13. Obukhov E. Ecology and nuclear energy Ekologiya i atomnaya energetika. Available at: http://www.ecoatominf.aaanet.ru/notes/control.htm (accessed Apr. 22 2017) (in Russian).
14. NP-001-15. Obschie polozheniya obespecheniya bezopasnosti atomnykh stancij. [General provisions for ensuring the safety of nuclear power plants.]. Moscow. Rostehnadzor Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
15. SSG-30. Safety classification of structures, systems and components in nuclear power plants. Vienna, IAEA, 2014.