+++

categories="article"
date="2017-11-28T01:14:53+03:00"
issue="2017-04"
issue_name="2017 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="13"
file="/pdf/2017/04/2017-04-article-13.pdf"
first_page="138"
last_page="150"
udc="621.039.51:539.17:004.652.4"
title="Converting ENDF libraries into relational format"
original_title="Конвертация библиотек ENDF в реляционный формат"
authors=["YuferovAG"]
tags=["ENDF library", "conversion", "relational format"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.13"

+++

The questions of converting the constants systems in the ENDF format into a relational database are considered. Such conversion may be one of the tools that simplify the development and exploitation of factual information, techniques and algorithms in the field of nuclear data, and consequently, increases the efficiency of the corresponding computational codes. The paper briefly reviewed the infological model of libraries ENDF. Is described the possible structure of the relational tables in the database. The proposed database schema and the form of tables takes into account the presence of both single and multiple properties of the considered isotopes. Is taken into account also the difference of requirements for transmission organization of relational tables into the programs and the organization of the visual analysis of data in the tables physicist appraiser. The algorithms of conversion and the results of conversion in relation to ROSFOND-A libraries and ENDF/B-VII.1 is described. Outlines the advantages of performing calculations directly in the DBMS environment to simplify programming and to exceptions the necessity of solving a number of tasks for verification and validation of data. Some possible approaches to ensure exploitation of legacy software in conjunction with the relational libraries of the constants is listed. Proposed some terminological clarification to facilitate the infological models construction for ENDF format. The conversion programs and library ENDF/B-VII.1-neutrons in the relational format posted on the public site http://178.215.91.20/nd.

### References

1. Kolesov V.E., Nikolaev M.N. Format biblioteki rekomendovannykh dannykh dlya rascheta reaktorov [The format of the library of recommended data for the calculation of reactors]. VANT. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 1972, no. 8, iss. 4, pp. 3-66 (in Russian).
2. Parker K. The Aldermaston Nuclear Data Library. AWRE Rep. 0-70/63, 1963.
3. Woll D. Card Image Format of the Karlsruhe Evaluated Nuclear Data File KEDAK. KFK880, EANDC-E-112 «U», EUP-4160e, 1968.
4. Drake M. S. Data Formats and Procedures for the ENDF Neutron Cross Section Library. BNL-50274, 1970.
5. Nikolaev M.N., Ryazanov B.G., Savoskin M.M., Cibulya A.M. Mnogogruppovoe priblizhenie v teorii perenosa neytronov [Multigroup approximation in the theory of neutron transport]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984. 256 p. (in Russian).
6. Pronyaev V., Winchell D., Zerkin V., Muir D., Arcilla R. Requirements for the Next Generation of Nuclear Databases and Services. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., suppl. 2, pp. 1476-1479, Proc. Int. Conf. on Nuclear Data for Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan, 7–12 October 2001.
7. MacFarlane R. E., Muir D. E. NJOY94.61: Code System for Producing Pointwise and Multigroup Neutron and Photon Cross Sections from ENDF/B Data, PSR-355, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico (1996).
8. Larson N.M. SAMMY User Guidance for ENDF Formats. ENDF367, ORNL/TM2007/23, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN (March 2007).
9. ENDF-6 Formats Manual, Data Formats and Procedures for the Evaluated Nuclear Data File ENDF/B-VI and ENDF/B-VII, BNL-90365-2009, edited by M.W. Herman and A. Trkov (June 2009), revised by M.W. Herman, A. Trkov and D.A. Brown (Dec. 2011).
10. Beck B., Hedstrom G. W., Hill T. S., Marchetti A. A., McNabb D. P. ASCII format specifi-cations for the Evaluated Nuclear Data Libraries (ENDL). Technical Report UCRL-TM-218475, LLNL, 2006.
11. Mattoon C.M., Beck B. R., Patel N. R., Summers N. C., Hedstrom G. W., Brown D. A. Generalized Nuclear Data: A New Structure (with Supporting Infrastructure) for Handling Nuclear Data. Nuclear Data Sheets, Dec 2012, v. 113, iss. 12, pp. 3145-3171.
12. Abramovich S.N., Gorelov V.P., Gorshikhin A.A., Grebennikov A.N., Ilin V.I., Krutko N.A., Farafontov G.G. Biblioteka neytronnykh dannykh TENDL i sistema 38-gruppovykh neytronnykh konstant TENDL038 [The TENDL Neutron Data Library and the 38-group neutron constant system TENDL038]. VANT. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 2001, no. 1, pp. 11-26 (in Russian).
13. Zizin M.N., Zagaczkiy B.A., Temnoeva T.A., Yaroslavceva L.N. Avtomatizaciya reaktornykh raschetov [Automation of reactor calculations]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974. 103 p. (in Russian).
14. Sinitsa V.V., Rineiskiy A.A. GRUCON – A Package of Applied Computer Programs, Rep. INDC(CCCP)-344, IAEA, Vienna (1993).
15. Koshcheev V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Korchagina Zh.A., Savoskina G.V. Biblioteka ocenennykh neytron-nykh dannykh FOND-2.2 [Library of the estimated neutron data FOND-2.2]. VANT. Ser. Yadernye konstanty – 2000, no. 2, pp. 40-70 (in Russian).
16. Plyaskin V. I., Kosilov R. A. Spravochno:informacionnye interaktivnye sistemy yaderno: fizicheskikh dannykh dlya razlichnykh prilozheniy yadernoy fiziki [Reference-information interactive systems of nuclear physical data for various applications of nuclear physics]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2002. 375 p. (in Russian).
17. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Programma podgotovki konstant CONSYST. Opisanie primeneniya: Preprint FEI-2828 [CONSYST code for neutron constants preparation. Scope statement: IPPE Preprint -2828]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2000. 41 p. (in Russian).
18. Zhuravlev V.I., Voronkov A.V., Brykin A.N., Sinicza V.V., Zemskov E.A., Kalchenko V.V. Novye vozmozhnosti GNDL – sistemy konstantnogo obespecheniya raschetov reaktorov i zashchity [New features of GNDL are the system of constant provision of reactor calculations and protection]. VANT. Ser. Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES. 2009, no. 24, pp. 29-37 (in Russian).
19. Koshcheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Cibulya A.M. Biblioteka gruppovykh konstant BNAB_RF dlya raschetov reaktorov i zashchity [Library of group constants BNAB_RF for reactor calculations and protection]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 83-101 (in Russian).
20. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N. Pervoocherednye zadachi razvitiya sistem konstantnogo obespeche-niya raschetov reaktorov i zashchity [Priorities for the development of systems for the constant supply of reactor calculations and protection]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 133-142 (in Russian).
21. Boboshin I.N.,Varlamov V.V., Trukhanov S.K. NESSY. Relyacionnaya baza dannykh po strukture i raspadam yader na IBM/PC [NESSY. Relational database on the structure and decays of cores on IBM / PC.]. VANT. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 1994, no. 3-4, pp. 75-81 (in Russian).
22. Boboshin I. N., Varlamov A. V., Varlamov V. V. I Web-server CDFE NPI MSU: bazy yadernofizicheskikh dannykh v gipertekstovom predstavlenii [Web-server CDFE INPI MSU: databases of nuclear-physical data in hypertext representation]. VANT. Ser. Yadernye konstanty. 1999, no. 2, pp. 99-110 (in Russian).
23. Boboshin I.N., Varlamov V.V., Varlamov A.V., Rudenko D., Stepanov M.E. Bazy yadernofizicheskikh dannykh centra dannykh fotoyadernykh eksperimentov [The Centre for Photonuclear Experiments Data Nuclear Data Bases]. Preprint NIIYaF MGU 99-26\584, 1999. 24 p. (in Russian).
24. Varlamov V.V., Ivanov S.V., Peskov N.N., Stepanov M.E. Novaya poiskovaya mashina dlya eksperimentalnykh dannykh po yadernym reakciyam iz mezhdunarodnoy sistemy EXFOR [A new search engine for experimental data on nuclear reactions from the international system EXFOR]. Sbornik trudov Tretey Vserossiyskoy konferencii po Elektronnym Bibliotekam RCDL’2001. Elektronnye biblioteki: perspektivnye metody i tekhnologii, elektronnye kollekcii. [Proc. of the III All-Russian Conference on Electronic Libraries RCDL’2001. Electronic Libraries: Advanced Methods and Technologies, Digital Collections]. Petrozavodsk, 11 – 13 sent. 2001. KarNCz RAN, 2001, pp. 166-173 (in Russian).
25. Varlamov V.V., Ishkhanov B.S. Bazy yadernykh dannykh v nauchnykh issledovaniyakh [Nuclear databases in scientific research]. Available at: http://nuclphys.sinp.msu.ru/bd/index.html (accessed 13 Feb. 2017) (in Russian).
26. Yuferov A.G. Nikolaev M.A., Komissarov S.A. Verifikaciya i validaciya fayla rezonansnykh parametrov v relyacionnom formate: Preprint FEI-3236 [Verification and validation of the file of resonant parameters in the relational format: IPPE Preprint -2828]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2013. 20 p. (in Russian).
27. Further Development of EXFOR Summary Report of the Consultant’s Meeting. INDC International Nuclear Data Committee. INDC(NDS)-0614. IAEA Headquarters, Vienna, Austria 6 – 9 March 2012.
28. Fan T.S., Huang G., Feng Y.G., Ye W.G., Liu W.L., Hong Y.J., Song X.X., Liu T.J., Chen J.X., Tang G.Y., Shi Z.M., Guo Z.Y. Study on Relational ENDF Databases and Online Services. Atomic Energy Science and Technology. Jan. 2005, v. 39, no. 1, pp. 28-31.
29. Alekseev A.V., Bnyatov A.V., Kasatkin S.S, Krutko N.A. Programmnyy kompleks GROUND kon-stantnogo obespecheniya yaderno-fizicheskimi dannymi [Software complex GROUND of constant supply with nuclear physical data]. Tezisy otraslevogo seminara «Neytronika:2012» [The thesis of the industry seminar “Neutronics-2012”]. Obninsk, 2012, pp. 33-34 (in Russian).
30. Yuferov A.G. Konvertaciya biblioteki ROSFOND:A v relyacionnuyu bazu dannykh: Preprint FEI-3194 [Converting the ROSFOND library to a relational database: IPPE Preprint-3194]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2011. 28 p. (in Russian).
31. Yuferov A.G., Komissarov S.A., Nikolaev M.A. Infologicheskaya model fayla rezonansnykh parametrov: Preprint FEI-3233 [Infologic model of the file of resonance parameters: IPPE Preprint -3233]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2013. 40 p. (in Russian).
32. Yuferov A.G., Komissarov S.A., Nikolaev M.A. Relyacionnaya model fayla uglovykh raspredeleniy: Preprint FEI-3235 [Relational model of the file of angular distributions: IPPE Preprint -3235]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2013. 20 p. (in Russian).
33. Holzner S. XSLT. Biblioteka programmista [XSLT. The programmer’s library]. Saint Petersburg. Piter Publ., 2002. 544 p. (in Russian).