+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:23:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="01"
file="pdf/2014/04/2014-04-article-01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="10"
udc="621.039"
title="Implementation of expert continuous acoustic-emission monitoring technology for NPP critical equipment operational defectiveness assessment"
original_title="Внедрение технологии экспертного непрерывного акустико-эмиссионного мониторинга для оценки эксплуатационной повреждаемости металла ответственного оборудования атомных станций"
authors=["BakirovMB", "PovarovVP", "NikolaevDA", "GromovAF", "LevchukVI", "GorokhovSM"]
tags=["acousticemission method", "data base", "data collection unit", "data storage unit", "monitoring", "steam generator", "preamplifier", "thermal shock", "signal shape"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.01"

+++

The problem of NPP primary equipment safe operation management currently acquires particular importance. A significant level of material ageing and technical and economic issues related to power unit decommissioning assume the development of new approaches to solving problems of condition monitoring and technical diagnostics of NPP main equipment. Methods of nondestructive testing are becoming increasingly popular for addressing issues of safety improvement. Various methods of nondestructive testing are focused on applications in different conditions and complement each other. Long time operation of a power unit leads to thermal fatigue damage accumulation at the  microstructural level, causing subsequent crack initiation and growth. Therefore, periodically obtained by traditional methods information is insufficient for an objective assessment of defective equipment condition and determination the remaining life. Thus, monitoring of problem areas during the NPP operation becomes a priority for the purpose of detailed exploration and damage prevention of working equipment. The results of the experimental implementation of the operational defectiveness by nondestructive testing technology based on the multiparameter acoustic emission continuous monitoring during the operation of power unit are presented in this article.

### References

1. Bakirov M.B. Povarov V.P. Razrabotka tehnologii nepreryvnogo akustiko-emissionnogo monitoringa ekspluatacionnoj povrezhdaemosti metalla otvetstvennogo oborudovaniya atomnyh stancij (Development of NPP critical equipment operational defectiveness continuous acoustic-emission monitoring technology). Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 15-24.
2. Acoustic emission monitoring. INSIGHT. 1995, v. 37, no. 4, p. 267.
3. Bailey C.D., Pless W.M. Acoustic emission: an emerging technology for assessing fatigue damage in aircraft structure. Materials Evaluation. 1981, v. 39, no. 11, pp. 1045-1050.
4. Ser’eznov, A.N., Stepanova, L.N., Kabanov, S.I., et al., Akustiko-emissionnyi kontrol’ aviatsionnykh sooruzhenii (Acoustic Emission Testing of Aerostructures), Stepanova, L.N. and Ser’eznov, A.N., Eds. Moscow, Mashinostroenie Publ., 2008 (in Russian).
5. Holroyd T.Y. The application of in condition monitoring. INSIGHT. 2005, v. 37, no. 8, pp. 481-484.
6. Boczar T., Zmarzly D. Analysis of acoustic emission pulses generated by-partial electrical discharges. INSIGHT. 2005, v. 45, no. 7, pp. 488-492.
7. PNAE G-01-011-97 (OPB 88/97) Obshhie polozheniya obespecheniya bezopasnosti atomnyh stancij (General Provisions for Ensuring the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants). Moscow,Gosatomnadsor Publ., 1997 (in Russian).