+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/04/02.pdf"
first_page="11"
last_page="20"
udc="621.039.4"
title="NPP-2006 with VVER-1200 type reactor – a new approach to displaying information from technical diagnostics systems"
original_title="АЭС 2006 с энергоблоками ВВЭР-1200 – новый подход к отображению информации от систем технической диагностики"
authors=["BaranovaYuA", "SlepovMT"]
tags=["VVER-1200", "technical diagnostics system", "diagnostic information", "hierarchical structure", "reporting", "on-screen presentation of information", "information noise"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.02"

+++

Operator performance in the main control room (MCR) is largely dependent on the form and amount of the information they receive about the plant status.

Unstructured form of information may result in an increase in its processing time and error in the decisions made by the operators.

Analysis of the projects of modern units with VVER reactor plant showed that developers pay close attention to readability of technological information to nuclear power plant (NPP) personnel. However, the process of presenting diagnostic information to operational NPP staff is sadly ignored by both developers of technical diagnostics systems (TDS) and MCR interface designers. Authors classify vibration monitoring systems, loose parts monitoring systems, leakages control systems and others as technical diagnosis systems. The essence of the problem lies in the fact that Russian nuclear systems of technical diagnostics are operated by different departments of the plant and therefore the requirements for displaying information from the staff of various departments are different.

To work with the current generation of systems of technical diagnostics requires special knowledge in the field of digital signal processing, vibration dynamics of rotating machines, reactor physics, and others, which the operational staff lack despite their high quality training. Moreover, most of the conclusions about the state of the equipment are probabilistic in nature, while the staff leading process requires specific answers to specific questions. Designers of TDS develop interface systems focusing on the knowledge and experience of the personnel departments of technical diagnostics, while the operating personnel is used to getting information in a completely different form. Hence, there is a lack of understanding between experts of the department of technical diagnostics and operational staff, which often leads to conflict situations.

This article provides an analysis of the information from the systems of technical diagnostics and attempts to formulate requirements for information output to operating personnel and to design a screen presentation of the information that went into the VVER-1200 project on the basis of this analysis.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. Sistemy diagnostirovaniya VVER [The Diagnostic Systems of VVER]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 2010. 391 p. (in Russian).
2. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Usanov A.I. Vibroshumovaya diagnostika VVER [The Vibronoise Diagnostics of VVER]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 2004. 345 p. (in Russian).
3. Skomorohov A.O., Slepov M.T. Kontrol’ dostovernosti informacii v sisteme vibrodiagnostiki Novovoronezhskoj AES [The validity of information in the vibration monitoring system at Novovoronezh] Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 1999, no. 1, pp. 56–65.
4. Skomorohov А.О., Slepov M.T. Pattern recognition in APL with application to reactor diagnostics. APL Quote Quad. 2000, v. 29, no. 3, pp. 164 – 172.