+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/04/04.pdf"
first_page="32"
last_page="40"
udc="620.9+544(075)"
title="Chemical decomposition of water into hydrogen in heterogeneous aluminium-containing compositions"
original_title="Химическое разложение воды на водород в гетерогенных алюминийсодержащих композициях"
authors=["MilinchukVK", "BelozerovVI", "AnanevaOA", "LarichevaTE", "KunitsynaTE"]
tags=["water", "hydrogen", "aluminum", "aluminum alloy", "aluminum oxide", "calcium oxide", "liquid sodium glass", "burnt lime"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.04"

+++

The aim of this work was to investigate the kinetic regularities and mechanism of chemical decomposition of water into hydrogen in heterogeneous hydro"reactive systems containing aluminum, aluminum alloys, and such chemical compounds as liquid sodium glass or quicklime giving water solution alkaline properties. The installation for studying the process of hydrogen generation in the temperature range from room temperature to 90 °С includes a thermostat and a reaction flask equipped with a tube to drain through the water in the measuring vessel formed of hydrogen. Endothermic decomposition of water into hydrogen in heterogeneous compositions containing aluminum and liquid sodium glass is based on hydrolysis of silicate salt, the reaction of sodium hydroxide with a thin surface film of aluminum oxide Al2O3, and the reaction of the recovery of hydrogen from water activated alumina. In the aluminum – quicklime composition, exothermic hydrogen generation involves removal of the protective oxide layer in the reaction of calcium oxide with aluminum oxide, the formation of hydroalumination calcium and activated aluminum interaction with water. The rate of formation and yield of hydrogen depend on the ratio of rate constants of the competing reactions of lime slaking and removal from the surface of the aluminum oxide film. Heterogeneous composition generates hydrogen, provided that the removal rate of the oxide film was greater than the speed of slaked lime, which is achieved by selecting the optimal ratio of aluminum, quicklime and water which should be enough to participate in the process of calcium oxide slaking in reactions with aluminum oxide and activated aluminum. The maximum hydrogen yield in the compositions containing the optimal ratio of metal, liquid sodium glass or quicklime is 1.2 liters of hydrogen per 1 g of aluminum.

### References

1. Kalin B.A., Platonov P.A., Tuzov Yu.V., Chernov I.I., Shtrombah Ya.I.. Fizicheskoe materialovedenie. T.8. Konstruktsionnyie materialyi yader-noy tehniki [Physical materials. V. 8. Structural materials of nuclear engineering]. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ. 2012. 736 p
2. Shilina A.S., Milinchuk V.K. Fiziko-himicheskie protsessyi poluche-niya vodoroda i adsorbenta, sootvetstvuyuschie printsipam «zelyonoj» сhimii [Physico-chemical processes for producing hydrogen and adsorbent corresponding to the principles of green chemistry]. Alternativnaya energetika i ekologiya. 2009, no. 10, pp. 10 – 14.
3. Milinchuk V.K., Shilina A.S., Ananeva O.A., Kunitsyina T.E., Pasevich O.F., Laricheva T.E. Issledovanie ekologicheski bezopasnyih, energosberegayuschih sposobov polucheniya vodoroda himicheskim razlozheniem vodyi [The study of environmentally friendly, energy-efficient ways of producing hydrogen by chemical decomposition of water]. Alternativnaya energetika i ekologiya. 2012, no. 4, pp. 49 – 54.
4. Milinchuk V.K., Belozerov V.I., Shilina A.S., Ananeva O.A., Kunitsyina T.E., Gordienko A.B. Issledovanie generatsii vodoroda pri vzaimodeystvii alyuminiya s vodnyimi rastvorami [Study of the generation of hydrogen by the interaction of aluminum with aqueous solutions]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 2, pp. 39 - 46.
5. Pravila obespecheniya vodorodnoy vzryivozaschityi na atomnoy stantsii [The rules provide hydrogen explosion at the nuclear power plant]. NP-040-02 (in Russian).
6. Ran F., Ada-mantiades A., Kenton Dzh., Braun Ch.; Pod red. Legasova . V.A.. Spravochnik po yadernoy energotehnologii [Handbook of nuclear energy technology]. Per. s angl. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ. 1989. 752 p. (in Russian).
7. Himicheskaya encyclopedia. Redkol.: Knunianz I. L. i drugie. M.: Sovetskaya encyclopedia, 1990. T. 2. – 611 s. [Chemical encyclopedia. The editorial board.: Knunianz I. L. and others. Moscow. Sovetskaya encyclopedia Publ., 1990, v. 2, 611 p.] (in Russian).
8. Roschektaev B.M. Vodno-Нimicheskiy rezhim AES s reaktorami VVER-1000 i RBMK-1000 [Water chemistry of nuclear power plants with reactors VVER-1000 and RBMK-1000]. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ. 2010. 132 p. (in Russian).
9. Mitigation of hydrogen hazards in severe accidents in nuclear plants. International atomic energy agency. Vienna. 2011.