+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:17:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="07"
file="/pdf/2014/04/2014-04-article-07.pdf"
first_page="60"
last_page="70"
udc="621.039"
title="Combined numerical and experimental investigations of hydrodynamics and coolant flow mass transfer out of spacer grid in fuel assemblies of floating power unit"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальные исследования гидродинамики и массообмена теплоносителя за дистанционирующей решеткой тепловыделяющей сборки реактора плавучего энергоблока"
authors=["DmitirevSM", "DoronkovDV", "ProninAN", "SolntsevDN", "SorokinVD", "KhrobostovAE"]
tags=["floating power unit", "core", "fuel assemblies", "spacer grid", "coolant flow hydrodynamics", "coolant flow mass transfer", "flow friction coefficients"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.07"

+++

The results of experimental investigations of local hydrodynamics and intercell mass transfer of coolant flow in characteristic zones FA KLT-40C reactor unit behind a plate spacer grid have been presented. The investigations were carried out on an aerodynamic rig using the admixture diffusion method (the tracer-gas method). Study of spatial dispersion of absolute flow velocity projections and distribution of tracer concentration allowed to specify coolant flow picture behind the plate spacer grid FA of KLT-40C reactor unit. In this article the measurement results of liquid resistance of plate spacer grid in dependence to Reynolds number. On the base of received experimental data specification of procedure coolant load calculation recommendations for detailed cell-wise calculations of a core KLT-40C reactor unit have been written. Investigation results of local hydrodynamics and coolant flow mass transfer in FA KLT-40C reactor unit have been taken for practical use by Afrikantov OKBM JSC when assessing heat engineering reliability of cores KLT-40C reactor unit and are included in database for verification of CFD programs (CFD-codes) and detailed cell-wise calculation of reactor core KLT-40C.

### References

1. Bykh O.A., Dmitriev S.M., Zverev D.L., Panov Y.K., Sorokin N.M., Farafonov V.A. Osnovnoe oborudovanie AES s korpusnymi reaktorami na teplovyh nejtronah [The main equipment of nuclear power plants with a tank reactor with thermal neutrons]. Moscow, Mashinostroenie Publ., 2013 (in Russian).
2. Volkov S.E., Kashinskiy O.N., Kurdyumov A.S., Lobanov P.D., Pribaturin N.A. Eksperimentalnoe issledovanie vliyaniya distantsioniruyuschey reshyotki na strukturu techeniya v TVS reaktora AES-2006 [Experimental Study of the Effect of Spacer Grid on the Flow Structure in Fuel Assemblies of the AES 2006 Reactor]. Teploenergetika. 2013. no. 1, pp. 63-67.
3. Barinov A.A., Borodina V.E., Dmitriev S.M., Khrobostov A.E. K voprosu o metodologii obosnovaniya teplotehnicheskoy nadezhnosti aktivnyih zon vodyanyih energeticheskih reaktorov [On the issue of core cooling reliability substantiation methodology for the pressurized water reactors]. Trudy Nizhegorodskogo gosudarstvennogo tehnicheskogo universiteta im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2014. no. 2, pp. 98-108 (in Russian).
4. Borodin S.S., Dmitriev S.M., Legchanov M.A., Solntsev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Khrobostov A.E. Eksperimentalnyie issledovaniya gidrodinamicheskih i massoobmennyih harakteristik potoka teplonositelya v TVSA VVER [Experimental studies of hydrodynamic and mass-transfer properties of coolant flow in VVER fuel assemblies TVSA]. Atomnaya energiya. 2012. 113 (5), pp. 252-257.
5. Varentsov A.V., Dmitriev S.M., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Samoilov O. B., Sorokin V.D., Khrobostov A.E. Raschetno-eksperimentalnye issledovaniya lokal’noj gidrodinamiki i massoobmena potoka teplonositelya v TVS-Kvadrat reaktorov PWR s peremeshivayuschimi reshyotkami [Combined numerical and experimental investigations of local hydrodynamics and coolant flow mass transfer in Kvadrat type fuel assemblies of PWR reactors with mixing grids]. Teploenergetika. 2014. no. 8, pp. 20-27.
6. Dmitriev S.M., Borodin S.S., Legchanov M.A., Solntsev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Khrobostov A.E. Osobennosti lokalnoj gidrodinamiki i massoobmena teplonositelya v TVS reaktorov VVER i PWR s peremeshivayuschimi reshyotkami [Features of local hydrodynamics and mass exchange of the heat-carrier in fuel rod assemblies of VVER and PWR with mixing grids]. Teplovye protsessy v tehnike. 2013. 5 (3), pp. 98-107.
7. Varentsov A.V., S.M.Dmitriev S.M., Dobrov A.A., Solntsev D.N., Khrobostov A.E. Eksperimentalnye i raschyotnye issledovaniya gidrodinamiki i massoobmena potoka teplonositelya v modeli TVS reaktora KLT-40S [Experimental and numerical researches of hydrodynamics and mass transfer of coolant flow in experimental model of KLT-40S reactor fuel assembly]. Nauchno+tehnicheskij vestnik Povolzh’ya. 2013, no. 3, pp. 114-119.
8. Zhukov A.V., Sorokin A.P. and Matyukhin N.M. Mezhkanalnyj obmen v TVS bystryh reaktorov: Teoreticheskie osnovy i fizika processa [Interchannel Transfer in Fuel Assemblies of Fast Neutron Reactors: Theoretical Principles and Physics of the Process]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989) [in Russian].