+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/04/08.pdf"
first_page="71"
last_page="81"
udc="621.039.543.4"
title="Calculational studies for securiti justification of SVBR 100 reactor fuel cycle based on reprocessed uranium"
original_title="Расчетные исследования в обоснование защищенности топливного цикла реактора СВБР-100 при использовании регенерированного урана"
authors=["DyachenkoAI", "FedorovMI", "SolovyevSV", "BalagurovNA", "ArtisyukVV"]
tags=["SVBR	100", "nonproliferation", "reprocessed uranium", "denaturation"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.08"

+++

It has been of general practice for several decades to use reprocessed uranium (RepU) in existing nuclear power reactors to save uranium resources. However, the effect of reprocessing on the fuel cycle economy is steel under discussion. Nowdays the major issues concerning the use of reprocessed uranium are specific measures necessary to compensate the presence of even Uranium isotopes 234U and 236U (neutron poisons) in loading fuel and 232U isotope decay chain products (208Tl – intensive gamma ray emitter with energy 2.614 MeV). In general, the presence of even Uranium isotopes leads to increased SWU demands and increased cost of U3O8 transformation into uranium hexafluoride, UF6. Recent trends in fuel cycle development are focusing the saving of uranium recourses, closing of nuclear fuel cycle and therefore an additional feasibility study for uranium reprocessing is necessarily required. Another feature of reprocessed uranium use is to possibility to increase the barrier against proliferation. The present paper deals with the possible use of reprocessed uranium to form barriers against proliferation of fissile materials in SVBR	100 fuel cycle. The features of the reprocessed uranium use in fast reactors are shown, quantitative estimates of the compensation of the initial presence of 236U isotope are given. Quantitative estimates of the required initial presence of 236U isotope in order to reduce the attractiveness of plutonium from the view point of proliferation are made. Quantitative estimates of possible using of reprocessed uranium from spent nuclear fuel of VVER	1000 and RBMK	1000 reactors.

### References

1. Federal target program «Nuclear power technologies of new generation in 2010-2015 and until 2020». Available at: http://www.businesspravo.ru/Docum/DocumShow_DocumID_163706.html (in Russian).
2. Adamov E. Breakthrough in Nuclear Energy: CNFC with natural safety – «Atomexpo -2012». Available at: http://2012.atomexpo.ru/material2012/06.06.2012 (in Russian).
3. Ryzhov S.B., Stepanov V.S., Klimov N.N., Zrodnikov A.V., Toshinskiy G.I., Komlev O.G. Innovative design of SVBR-100 reactor. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. NPP Safety. 2009, iss. 24, pp. 5-7 (in Russian)
4. Voronkov A.V., Sychugova E.P., Dedul A.V., Kalchenko V.V., Nikolaev A.A., Rakshun E.V. SVBR-100 reactor life-time calculation considering control and burn-up compensation RODS movement Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. NPP Safety. 2009, iss. 24, pp. 38-43 (in Russian).
5. Kessler G. Plutonium Denaturing by 238Pu. Nuclear Science and Engineering, v. 155, no. 1, January 2007, pp. 53-73.
6. Kang J., von Hippel F.N. U-232 and the Proliferation-Resistance of U-233. Spent Fuel Science & Global Security. 2001, v. 9, pp .1-32.
7. Kryuchkov E., Apse V., Glebov V., Krasnobaev A., Shmelev A. Obogashchennyj uran s dobavleniem izotopa 232U: zashchishchennost’ ot nesanktsionirovannogo rasprostraneniya. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2007, no.4, p. 93 (in Russian).
8. Dyachenko A., Balagurov N., Artisuyk V. On the Issues of Uranium Reprocessed from High Burnup Fuels. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2012, no. 1, p. 135 (in Ruaaian).
9. Bowman S.M. Overview of the SCALE Code System. Ed. S.M. Bowman. Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc. – 2007, no. 7, Nov. 11–15, pp. 589–591.
10. Voronkov A.V., Golovkov S.L. System facilities of REACTOR-GP code package. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. NPP Safety., 2009, iss. 24, pp. 19-29 (in Russian).
11. Durante Pierre. Processing of recycled uranium: experience in the Cogema group. TopFuel’97. BNES. 1997.
12. Ellis Ronald J. Prospects of Using Reprocessed Uranium in CANDU Reactors, in the US GNEP Program. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, PO Box, Oak Ridge, TN 3783126172. 2008.
13. Tataurov A., Kvator V. R&D Report. Calculated-experimental studying nuclide composition of SNF from VVER-440, VVER-1000, and RBMK-1000. RNC «КI» Publ., 2002 (in Russian).