+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:14:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="10"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/04/10.pdf"
first_page="92"
last_page="101"
udc="621.039.526"
title="Comparison of fuel cycles characteristics for nuclear energy systems based on VVER-TOI and BN-1200 reactors"
original_title="Сравнение характеристик топливных циклов стационарной ядерной энергетики на основе реакторов ВВЭР-ТОИ и БН-1200"
authors=["KagramanianVS", "KalashnikovAG", "KapranovaEN", "PuzakovAYu"]
tags=["nuclear energy systems", "VVER-TOI", "BN-1200", "fuel cycles", "plutonium recycle", "minor actinides accumulation"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.10"

+++

The aim is to determine the characteristics of the fuel cycle (FC) based on stationary nuclear power system based on VVER0TOI and BN01200 reactors with fuel of different composition. Characteristics of reactor systems with partial or complete SNF reprocessing and recycling of plutonium are compared to those of the reference system consisting only of VVER0TOI with uranium oxide fuel, operating in an open FC.

The following characteristics of the system are considered:
– reactor shares (VVER0TOI with uranium oxide fuel, VVER0TOI with partial loading of MOX0fuel, BN01200);
– share of MOX0fuel assemblies in VVER reactors;
– consumption of natural uranium;
– plutonium content into MOX0 VVER0TOI and BN01200 fuel;
– accumulation of spent nuclear fuel, plutonium and MA.

For systems with a fully closed fuel cycle, a condition of complete balance of plutonium production and consumption was set. Solving equations of the balance of plutonium in the system in this case is determined by iteration.

It is shown that in a system consisting only of VVER0TOI, complete closure of FC with plutonium multiple recycling is impossible. With multiple recycling, plutonium isotopic composition in this system is strongly degraded. Therefore, the required content of plutonium in MOX fuel far exceeds the amount of the permissible conditions of negative void reactivity effect. Introduction BN01200 fast neutron reactors to the system in addition to VVER0TOI with partial loading of MOX0fuel is used to stop the degradation of the isotopic composition of plutonium in its multiple recycling and to ensure that the value of plutonium in MOX0VVER0TOI does not exceed the safety margin. As a result, consumption of natural uranium is reduced 2.6 times compared with the reference system, with no accumulation of spent fuel and plutonium in the system.

### References

1. Wiese H.W. Investigation of the nuclear inventories of high exposure PWR-mixed oxide fuels with multiple recycling of self generated plutonium, Nucl. Technol. 102 (April 1993), pp. 68-80.
2. Languille A., Garnier J.C., Verrier D. Sunderland R.E., Kiefhaber E., Newton T. CAPRA Core Studies-the Oxide Reference Option, Proc. GLOBAL ’95,Versailles, France. 1995, v. 1, p. 874.
3. Baets U., Raedt Ch. De Limitations of actinide recycle and fuel cycle consequences: a global analysis. Nuclear Engineering and Design 168 (1997), pp. 191- 201.
4. Yu. S. Fedorov, B.A. Bibichev, B.Ya. Zil’berman, E.G. Kudryavtsev. Use of recovered uranium and plutonium in thermal reactors. At. Energy, 99 (2005), pp. 572–576.
5. Alekseev P.N., Bobrov E.A., Chibinyaev A.V., Teplov P.S., Dudnikov A.A. Variants of the perspective closed fuel cycle, based on Regenerated Mixture – Technology, combining use of thermal and fast reactors. Progress in Nuclear Energy, v. 72, April 2014, pp. 126–129.
6. Nikolaev М., Tsiboulia A., Gerdev G., Rozhikhin Е., Koscheev V. Updating, Supplementing and Validation of the WIMS-D4 Group Constant Set: S&T Report. French-Russian Seminar. Obninsk, April 24 - 25, 1995.
7. Askew J. R., Fayers E. J., Kemshell P. B. A General Description of the Lattice Code WIMS: J. Brit. Nucl. Soc, 5, 564 (1966).
8. Neutronics Benchmarks for the Utilization of Mixed-Oxide-Fuel: Joint U.S./Russian Progress Report for Fiscal Year 1997. v. 3 - Calculations Performed in the Russian Federation. ORNL/TM-13603. pp. 6 - 8.1998.
9. Yatsenko A.M., Chebeskov A.N., Kagramanian V.S., Kalashnikov A.G. Metodika ekvivalentirovaniya plutoniya razlichnogo izotopnogo sostava primenitel’no k sistemnym issledovaniyam v atomnoj energetike [Plutonium equivalence method in relation to system researches in nuclear power]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2012, no. 1, pp. 31–41.
10. Artem’ev N.I., Dekusar V.M., Kalashnikov A.G., Moseev A.L. RZA – kompleks program mnogogruppovogo raschyota dvumernogo reaktora v oblastyah zamedleniya i termalizacii nejtronov s uchyotom vygoraniya. Preprint GNC RF-FEI-1679, 1985. [RZA-code complex of multigroup reactor calculation in moderation and thermalization neutrons regions taking into account burning out. IPPE Preprint-1679]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1985 (in Russian).
11. Gruppovye konstanty dlya raschyota reaktorov i zaschity [Group constants for calculation of reactor and shields]. Pod red. M.N. Nikolaeva, Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981 (inRissian).
12. Le Mer J., Carzenne C, Lemasson D. France EDF Research Scenarios for Closing the Plutonium Cycle. International Conference of Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles. Safe Technologies and Sustainable Scenarios FR13, 4-7 March 2013, Paris, France. Paper N IAEA-CN-199-292.