+++

categories="article"
date="2014-12-29T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2014-04"
issue_name="2014 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="11"
file="/pdf/2014/04/2014-04-article-11.pdf"
first_page="102"
last_page="110"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Assessment of the increasing in 131I production due to improved tellurium target in the WWR-C reactor core"
original_title="Оценка увеличения производства 131I при использовании теллуровых мишеней усовершенствованной конструкции на реакторе ВВР-ц"
authors=["KochnovOY", "KolesovVV", "FominRV", "JerdevGM"]
tags=["WWR c reactor", "tellurium target", "131I production"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.11"

+++

Currently, the problem of expanding the production of 131I radionuclide for medical purposes is still relevant. The main consumer of this product in the European region is the MRRC of the Russian Ministry of Healthcare (Obninsk). 131I production at the Obninsk Branch of the JSC “Karpov Institute of Physical Chemistry” is insufficient and requires additional supplies of 131I from NIIAR (Dimitrovgrad). On the other hand, due to the fact that the half life of 131I is only eight days, its transportation over long distances is not feasible. Therefore, an increase in this isotope production at the Obninsk Branch of the Karpov Institute can bring significant economic benefits.

At present a new design of the target for 131I production has been developed. However, comparative assessment of standard and modified targets efficiency has not been performed so far.

This paper presents some estimates of 131I production with both targets which were irradiated in the WWR c reactor. It is shown that a new target provides a significant (by a factor of three) increase in 131I production, while specific concentration of 131I in the initial target is slightly (about 20%) decreased. We have also investigated replacing aluminum alloy target shell with one made of stainless steel and found a 20% decrease in the 131I yield.

The comparison between the calculated 131I yield and the actual 131I yield testifies that the cumulated 131I yield can be significantly increased.

### References

1. Kolesov V.V., Kochnov О.Yu., Volkov Yu.V., Ukraintsev V.F., Fomin R.V. Sozdaniye precisionnoj modeli reactora VVR-c dlya posleduyschej optimizacii ego construkcii i narabotki 99Mo i drugih radionuclidov. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2011, v.4, pp. 129-133.
2. Judith F. Briesmeister, Ed., “MCNP – A General Monte Carlo Code for Neutron and Photon Transport. Version 3A”, LANL report LA7396-M, rev.2, 1986.
3. VisualBurnOut. Svidetelstvo o gosudarstvennoi registracii programmy dlya EVM№2009617021. Zaregistrirovano v Reestre program dlya EVM 9/12/ 2009 (in Russian).
4. Gerasimov A.S., Zaritskaya T.S., Rudik A.P. Spravochnik po obrazovaniyu nuclidov v yadernuh reactorah. Мoscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 575 p. (in Russian).
5. Hermann O.W., Westfall R.M. ORIGEN-S, Scale System Module to Calculate Fuel Depletion, Actinide Transmutation, Fission Product Buildup and Decay, and Assotiated Radiation Source Terms. ORNL, MARTIN MARIETTA ENERGY SYS., NUREG/CR-0200, v. 2, sec. F7, 1992.