+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2016-02"
issue_name="2016 - #02"
number="12"
file="pdf/2016/02/2016-02-article-12.pdf"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Thorium-loaded low-power reactor installation operated with superlong fuel residence time"
authors=["ShamaninIV", "BedenkoSV", "ChertkovYB"]
tags=["thorium", "plutonium", "thoriumloaded lowpower reactor installation", "superlong fuel residence"]
rubric="physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name="Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"

+++

It was established in numerical experiments conducted at the Institute for Safety Research and Reactor Technologies (ISR2) of the research center Forschungszentrum Julich (1998 – 1999) that thoriumplutonium fuel composition ensures due to the presence of anomaly in the dependence of resonance neutron absorption on the ratio of moderator volume to fuel volume the possibility to organize superlong duration of fuel residence in the cores of VVER-type reactors. 
Such possibility was demonstrated in the present study for hightemperature thoriumloaded reactor installation with 60 MW power. 
In this case the ratio of moderator volume to the volume of resonance absorber in the reactor core is within the interval of (45 – 60).
It is specifically such type of lowpower reactor installations that may constitute the basis of regional power generation in Russia.

The purpose of the study was to investigate the neutronics characteristics of thorium loaded lowpower reactor installation with fuel blocks and fuel pellets with different configurations in order to select the reactor core design and the core fuel load ensuring optimal utilization of thorium in it and obtaining maximum possible generation of energy in the course of superlong fuel residence in the core.

Implemented studies and numerical experiments were performed using verified computation codes included in the MCU5 and WIMSD5B software packages, updated libraries of evaluated nuclear data (ENDF/B-VII.0, JEFF-3.1.1, JENDL-4.0, ROSFOND, BROND, ABBA and others) and multigroup approximations.

It was established that thoriumloaded reactor installation with suggested design is the installation operated with fast and intermediate neutrons. 
Results of calculation allow making the conclusion that reactor installation with suggested configuration of the fuel block and the fuel pellet, as well as with the fuel composition in question can be operated during not less than 3500 effective days at the power level of 60 MW
without reloading.

### References

1. Alekseev N.I., Bol’shagin S.N., Gomin E.A., Gorodkov S.S., Gurevich M.I., Kalugin M.A., Kulakov A.S., Marin S.V., Novosel’tsev A.P., Oleynik D.S., Pryanichnikov A.V., Sukhino-Khomenko E.A., Shkarovskiy D.A., Yudkevich M.S. The status of MCU-5. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2012, v. 75, no. 14, pp. 1634-1646.
2. Daniel L. Aldama, Trkov A., Analysis of the Burnup Credit Benchmark with an updated WIMS-D library. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2000, v. 27, iss. 2, pp. 169-174.
3. National Nuclear Data Center. Brookhaven National Laboratory. Available at: http://www.nndc.bnl.gov (accessed 2 Dec. 2015).
4. Rossijskaja biblioteka fajlov ocenennyh nejtronnyh dannyh. Gosudarstvennyj nauchnyj centr Rossijskoj Federacii – Fiziko-jenergeticheskij institut im. A.I. Lejpunskogo (Russian library of evaluated neutron data files. Joint Stock Company «State Scientific Centre of the Russian Federation – Institute for Physics and Power Engineering named after A.I.Leypunsky»). Available at: http://www.ippe.ru/podr/abbn/libr/rosfond.php (accessed 2 Dec. 2015) (in Russian).
5. Orlov V.V., Filin A.I., Smirnov V.S. Bystryj reaktor estestvennoj bezopasnosti so svincovym teplonositelem dlya krupnomasshtabnoj yadernoj energetiki [Fast Reactor natural safety with lead coolant for largescale nuclear power]. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 2001. 221 p. (in Russian).
6. Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N., Abrosimov N.G., Vasyaev A.V., Ganin M.E., Golovko V.F., Zverev D.L., Kodochigov N.G., Petrunin V.V. Similarity of hightemperature gascooled reactor technologies and designs in Russia and USA. Atomic Energy. 2010, v. 108, no 2, pp. 89-96.
7. Zhukov A.V., Kuzina Ju.A., Belozerov V.I. Reaktory s tyazhelym teplonositelem i nekotorye teplogidravlicheskie dannye dlya nih [Reactors with Heavy Liquid-Metal Coolants and Some Thermohydraulic Data for them]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no 3, pp. 100-111 (in Russian).
8. Shamanin I.V., Bedenko S.V., Chertkov Y.B., Gubaydulin I.M. Gazoohlazhdaemyj yadernyj reaktor s torievym toplivom na osnove toplivnogo bloka unificirovannoj konstrukci [Gas Cooled Thorium Reactor with Fuel Block of the Unified Design]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no 3, pp. 124-134 (in Russian).
9. Shamanin I., Bedenko S., Chertkov Y., Gubaydulin I. GasCooled Thorium Reactor with Fuel Block of the Unified Design. Advances in Materials Science and Engineering. 2015, v. 2015, Article ID 392721, 8 p. doi:10.1155/2015/392721.
10. Glushkov E.S., Garin V.P., Glushkov A.E. Statistical analysis of certificate data for HTGR microfuel. Atomic Energy. 2007, v. 103, no 4, pp. 783-788.
11. Chukbar B.K. Verification of statistical method CORN for modeling of microfuel in the case of high grain concentration. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, no 11, pp. 1200-1205.
12. Kania M.J., Nabielek H., Verfondern K. Testing of HTR UO2
 TRISO fuels in AVR and in material test reactors. Journal of Nuclear Materials.2013, v. 441, no. 13, pp. 545-562.
13. Plukienea R., Ridikas D. Modelling of HTRs with Monte Carlo: from a homogeneous to an exact heterogeneous core with microparticles. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2003, v. 32, no. 16, pp. 1573-1585.
14. Fu M., Liang T., Tang Y. Preparation of UO<sup>2</sup>  kernel for HTR10 fuel element. Nuclear Science and Technology. 2004, v. 41, no. 9, pp. 943-948.
15. Kania M.J., Nabielek H., Verfondern K. SiCcoated HTR fuel particle performance. Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings.2013, v. 33, no 9. pp. 33-70.
16. Minato K., Fukuda K., Ishikawa A., Mita N. Advanced coatings for HTGR fuel particles against corrosion of SiC layer. Journal of Nuclear Materials.1997, v. 246, no 23, pp. 215-222.
17. Hernikov A.S., Permyakov L.N., Fedik I.I. Fuel elements on the basis of spherical fuel particles with protective coatings for highsafety reactors. Atomic-Energy.1999, v. 87, no. 6, pp. 871-878.
18. Nabielek H., Van Der Merwe H., Fachinger J., Verfondern K., Von Lensa W., Grambow B., De Visser-Tynova E. Ceramic coated particles for safe operation in HTRS and in longterm storage. Ceramic Engineering and Science Proceedings. 2010, v. 30, no. 10, pp. 193-202.
19. Shamanin I.V., Ukhov A.A., Rutten H. J., Haas K., Sherer W. Rezultaty modelirovaniya parametrov toplivnogo cikla dlya vodovodyanogo energeticheskogo reaktora WWER1000 s zagruzkoj torijuranplutonievyh toplivnyh kompozicij [Results of the Simulation of Parameters of the Fuel Cycle for the WWER1000 Reactor with (m%Th<sup>232</sup>, n%U<sup>235</sup>, k%Pu<sup>239</sup>)O<sup>2</sup> FuelCompositions]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2000, no. 4, pp. 53–64 (in Russian).