+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file="pdf/2018/02/2018-02-article-03.pdf"
first_page="25"
last_page="36"
udc="621.039.516"
title="System competitiveness of nuclear power"
original_title="Системная конкурентоспособность ядерных энергоисточников"
authors=["UsanovVI"]
tags=["nuclear energy business", "competitiveness", "electricity cost", "deregulated market", "financing instruments", "calculation model", "financially integrated system"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.03"

+++

The study analyzes the possibilities to increasing the attractiveness of commercial nuclear electricity generation in deregulated markets. The model developed in the presented work calculates the cost of electricity generated not by a single energy unit but by a system of financially integrated energy units of a certain technological type. The paper addresses the issues of the cost calculations in the systems of the kind. It shows that the estimated unit cost of electricity produced in a nuclear-energy financial-integrated system with the number of power units greater than one financed by shareholders and creditors may be lower in comparison with the cost of electricity produced by economically detached power units of the same capacity under the same conditions of investment.

The effect is achieved due to the component of short-term credit in the cost of electricity, the return of funds on which at a time can be carried out for a smaller number of power units (up to one), while electricity is produced by all units of the system. The results of cost calculations with the use of the developed model indicate that the transition from economic models of detached nuclear power units to models of nuclear power complexes can bring economics of nuclear power systems closer to the economics of combined-cycle gas turbine systems. Achieving this objective can contribute to the growth of public and private investment in the nuclear energy business.

### References

1. Belyaev L.S. Problems of the electricity market. Novosibirsk. Nauka Publ., 2009, 295 p. (in Russian).
2. The Future of Nuclear Power. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study, 2003, 170 p.
3. The Economic Future of Nuclear Power. University of Chicago, 2004, 368 p.
4. Cost estimating guidelines for generation IV nuсlеar enеrgy systems. GIЕ/EMWG /2007/004. Revision 4.2. September 2007. 181 p.
5. Alan E. Waltar, Donald R. Todd, Pavel V. Tsvetkov. Fast Spectrum Reactors. Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2012. 720 p.
6. INPRO Methodology for sustainability assessment of nuclear energy systems: Economics. INPRO Manual. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No NG-T-4.4. IAEA, Vienna, 2014, 92 p.
7. Есonomiс Еvaluation of Bids for Nuсlear Power Plants. 1999 Edition. Teсhniсal Reports Series No. 396, IAЕА, Vienna, 2000. 224 p.
8. Projected costs of generating electricity, 2015 Edition. International Energy Agency (NEA), N.7054, OECD, 2015. 212 р.
9. Methodological recommendations for evaluating the effectiveness of investment projects. Moscow. Economika Publ., 2008, 421 p. (in Russian).
10. Kovalev V.V. The financial analysis. Capital Management. The choice of investment. Analysis of reporting. Moscow. Finansy i Statistika Publ., 1995. 113 p. (in Russian).
11. Shevelyov Ya.V., Klimenko A.V. The effective economy of the nuclear fuel and energy complex. Мoscow RGGU Publ., 1996. 734 p. (in Russian).
12. Karhov A.N. Equilibrium pricing in the economy on the basis of discounted cost. Preprint IBRAE-98-07. Мoscow. IBRAE Publ., 1998, 59 p. (in Russian).
13. Karhov A.N. Marginal costs and equilibrium prices in microeconomics. Preprint IBRAE-99-02. Мoscow. IBRAE Publ., 1999, 34 p. (in Russian).
14. Karhov A.N. Development prospects of nuclear power in market conditions. Problemyprognozirovaniya. 2014, no 4. pp. 26-37 (in Russian).
15. Kazachkovskij O.D. Fundamentals of the rational theory of value. Мoscow. Energoizdat Publ., 2000. 88 p. (in Russian).
16. Kharitonov V.V., Kosterin N.N. Criteria of return on investment in nuclear energy. Izvestiya vuzov, Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no.2, pp. 157-168 (in Russian).
17. Rachkov V.I., Tyurin V.I., Usanov V.I., Voschinin A.P. Efficiency of nuclear energy technology. System criteria and directions of development. Moscow CNIIAtominform Publ., 2008. 228 p. (in Russian).
18. The economics of nuclear fuel cycle. Nuclear Energy Agency. Organization of Economic Development and Cooperation. Paris. 1994. 164 p.
19. Framework for Assessing Dynamic Nuclear Energy Systems for Sustainability, Final Report of the INPRO Collaborative Project GAINS, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series NP-T-1.14, 2013, p. 252.
20. Solodov A.K. Methodological problems of application of the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) in financial calculations. Finansovyj menedzher, 2013, no. 3, pp. 35-41 (in Russian).
21. Blank I.A. Management of financial resources. Мoscow. Omega Publ., 2010, 768 p. (in Russian).