+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="05"
file="pdf/2018/02/2018-02-article-05.pdf"
first_page="47"
last_page="57"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Rococo system of combined neutron constants – current status and results of testing using geometrical module of the MMK code"
original_title="Система комбинированных констант рококо – современное состояние, результаты тестирования с геометрическим модулем ММК"
authors=["JerdevGM", "KislitsynaTS", "NikolaevMN"]
tags=["new ROCOCO combined system of neutron constant preparation", "further refinement", "introduction in the practice of calculations", "Monte-Carlo method", "results of comparative calculations", "potential of development"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.05"

+++

Results of studies aimed at the further refinement of the ROCOCO system (routine for calculation and organization of combined constants including cross-sections in group and subgroup representation and with detailed description of neutron cross-section energy dependence) [1, 2] are presented in the present paper. Inclusion of this system as a physical module into a set of Monte Carlo calculation codes with OOBG geometric module from the MMK [3] code is discussed. OOBG module is designed for calculation of neutron multiplication systems with heterogenous cores arrange as hexagonal grids with different degrees of complexity. The complex was named ROCOCO-MMK. Results of testing the complex in the calculations of multi-zone neutron multiplication systems (including those with zones containing neutron moderator, zones with close composition but with different temperature, etc.) are described. Accounting for the dependence of constants for one and the same nuclide in the zones with different compositions and temperatures required substantial modernization of routines for preparation of constants for calculation described in [1]. Algorithm for preparation of subgroup constants was changed, methodology for taking into account resonance self-screening of cross-sections within the range of unresolved resonances was improved, and other changes were introduced in the process of this modernization.

Results of calculations are compared with data obtained using the MCNP-5 precision program [4], which is linked to the same library of evaluated neutron data ROSFOND as that used in ROCOCO. The ROCOCO-MMK includes procedures for registering different neutron flux functionals (also based on ROCOCO data), which allowed including it in the SCALA computation complex [3, 5] and step-by-step calculation of evolution of fuel nuclide composition during the fuel residence campaign. Directions of further development of the system are outlined in conclusion and, in particular, somepossibilities of using the created software for further improvement of methods for preparation of few-group constants for calculations in diffusion approximation are examined.

### References

1. Zherdev G.M., Kislitsyna T.S., Nikolaev M.N. ROCOCO – system of nuclear data preparation for reactor calculations by Monte-Carlo method. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2018, no. 1, pp. 41-52 (in Russian).
2. Kislitsina T.S., Nikolaev M.N. ROCOCO. Svidetel’stvo o gosudarstvennoj registracii programmy dlja JeVM № 2016612400 ot 26.02.2016 (in Russian).
3. Zherdev G.M., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. The system of Computer Analysis for Licensing the nuclear and radiation safety in the Nuclear industry. Centr Organizacii Ekspertiz Programm NTS YaRB. Chast’ 2. Vychislitel’nye programmy. Inv. OFAP № 3811. 2003. Chast’ 3. Instrukciya pol’zovatelya. Inv. OFAP № 3809. 2003(in Russian).
4. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code. Version 5 / Volume I. Overview and Theory. LANL LA-UR-03-1987.
5. Zherdev G.M. SKALA – The Computing System for an Estimation of Nuclear and Radiation Safety, M&C2005/ Avignon, France, September 12–15 2005.
6. Zhemchugov E.V. Program SUBGROUPS. Available at http://jini-zh.org/subgroups/ subgroups.html (accessed 10.01.2018) (in Russian).
7. Petrie L.M., Landers N.F. КENO VA – An Improved Monte Carlo Criticality Program with Supergrouping. Vol.2, Section F11 from «SCALE: A Modular Code System for PerformingStandardized Computer Analyses for Licensing Evaluation». NUREG/CR-0200. Rev. 2 (ORNL/ NUREG/CSD-2/R2) (December, 1984).
8. Blyskavka A.A., Korobeinikov V.V., Koshheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Polevoy V.B., Raskach K.F., Rozhihin E.V., Semjonov M.Y., Tsibulya A.M. MMKKENO. Svidetel’stvo o gosudarstvennoj registracii programmy dlya EVM № 2014610575 ot 15.01.2014 (in Russian).
9. NJOY99.0 Code System for Producing Pointwise and Multigroup Neutron and Photon Cross Sections from ENDF/B Data. RSICC Peripheral Shielding Routine Collection. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Documentation for PSR-480/NJOY99.0 Code Package (March 2000).
10. Blyskavka A.A., Zhemchugov E.V., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Raskach K.F., Semenov M.Y., Tsibulya A.M. MMKC. Svidetel’stvo o gosudarstvennoj registracii programmy dlja JeVM № 2014612579 ot 28.02.2014 (in Russian).
11. Cullen D.E. Program SIGMA1 (version 74-1). Lawrence Livermore Laboratory report UCID-16426 (January, 1974).
12. NEA/NSC/DOC(95)03/III. Volume III. IEU-MET-FAST-015.
13. NEA/NSC/DOC(95)03/VI. Volume VI. MIX-MISC-FAST-003.
14. Bednyakov S.M. Minor Actinides at BFS Facility: Current Activity, Research Tools and Possible Investigations. Available at https://www.oecd-nea.org/download/ma-ii/documents/Attachment2-ref.in3.2.3.pdf (accessed Jan 10 2018)
15. Zherdev G.M. The calculation of isotope kinetic and the radiation source in the SCALA/BNAB system programs and libraries. Proc. of the X Yubilejnoj rossijskoj nauchnoj konferencii «Radiacionnaya zaschita i radiacionnaya bezopasnost’ v yadernyh tehnologiyakh», 22-25 sent. 2015. Sbornik tezisov, dopolnenie, pp. 16-17 (in Russian).
16. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Polyakov A.Yu., Tsibulya A.M. CONSYST Program description. VANT. Ser. «Yadernye konstanty». 1999, v. 2, p. 148 (in Russian).
17. Kislitsina T.S., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Pivovarov V.A., Semjonov M.Ju., Seriozhin A.S., Tsibulya A.M. TRIGEX. Svidetel’stvo o gosudarstvennoj registracii programmy dlya EVM № 2013660588 ot 11.11.2013 (in Russian).