+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="09"
file="/pdf/2018/02/2018-2-article-9.pdf"
first_page="89"
last_page="100"
udc="621.039.583+621.039.586"
title="Severe beyond design basis accident on Bilibino NPP EGP-6 reactor. Analysis of consequences of the radiological accident for public"
original_title="Тяжелая запроектная авария РУ ЭГП-6 Билибинской аэс. Анализ последствий для населения"
authors=["MukhamadeyevRI", "BaranayevYuD", "SuvorovAP"]
tags=["severe accident", "radioactive release", "consequences of radiological accident", "decision-making criteria", "protective measures"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.09"

+++

Brief description is given in the paper of features of the VYBROS-3.1 code for evaluation of radiological consequences of radioactive release during normal operation and accidents on reactors of NPP for nuclear plant personnel and population within the area in the vicinity of the NPP site. Input meteorological data and information about the distribution of people on the area surrounding the Bilibino NPP (BiAES) are examined. Information about the source of radioactivity release generated based on the worst case (conservative) and the most probable approaches to the development of severe beyond design basis accident is presented. Analysis of radiation consequences of severe beyond design basis accident on EGP-6 nuclear reactor of the BiAES caused by introduction of positive reactivity caused by spontaneous shifting of two pairs of automatic control (AC) rods aggravated by complete failure of reactor safety system was performed using VYBROS-3.1 code. Accident developing according to the above scenario results in the severest possible scale of destruction of fuel and localizing safety barriers and represents the maximum possible case from the viewpoint of radiation impact on the population. Technical and organizational protective measures allowing mitigating these consequences in pursuance with requirements of acting regulatory documents are suggested. It is demonstrated that even in the case of radioactivity release under the conservative approach to the evaluation implementation of emergency protective measures in the form of evacuation of public will not be required.

### References

1. Mukhamadeev R.I., Cherkasov M.V., Baranaev Yu.D., Suvorov A.P. Code VYBROS-3.1 for assuming of consequences of atmosphere radioactive release for public. VANT. Ser. Nuclear reactor physics, accepted for publication (in Russian).
2. Mukhamadeev R.I., Cherkasov M.V., Baranaev Yu.D., Suvorov A.P. Code VYBROS-3.1. Certificate of state registration for computer programs № 2017619705. Federal System of Intellectual Property, 01 September 2017, 6 p. (in Russian).
3. МТ 1.2.5.05.0110-2012. Guide on Emergency Management of Off-Site Response for NPP. Moscow. Concern «Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2012, 48 p. (in Russian).
4. МU 1.3.2.06.027.0017-2010. Radiation Protection Zones of NPP. Guide on Calculation and Substantiation of Size. Moscow. Concern «Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2010, 57 p. (in Russian).
5. МТ 1.2.1.15.1176-2016. Guide to Specifications for maximum permissible release of radioactive substances of NPP to atmosphere. Moscow. Concern «Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2016, 78 p. (in Russian).
6. RB-106-15. Recommended calculation methods for parameters, which need to identify of specifications for maximum permissible release of radioactive substances to atmosphere. Moscow. Rostechnadzor Pupl., 2015, 59 p. (in Russian).
7. МU 2.6.5.010-2016. Specifications of sizes and maintainnance conditions for radiation protection zones of radiation objects. Moscow. Rostechnadzor Publ., 2016, 77 p. (in Russian).
8. K.F. Eckerman, R.W. Leggett, V. Berkovski, I.A. Likhtarev, L. Bertelli, D. Nosske, A.W. Phipps, G.M. Kendall. ICRP Database of Dose Coefficients: Workers and Members of Public. Version 3, ICRP, 1998-2011. Available at http://www.icrp.org/page.asp?id=145 (accessed Mar 10 2017).
9. Eckerman K., Harrison J., Menzel H.-G., Clement C.H. Compendium of Dose Coefficients based on ICRP Publication 60, ICRP Pub.119, Elsevier, 2012, 132 p.
10. Keith F. Eckerman and Jeffrey C. Ryman. External Exposure to Radionuclides in Air, Water and Soil. Federal Guidance Report No.12, EPA-402-R-93-081, September 1993, 238 p.
11. Generic procedures for assessment and response during a radiological emergency. IAEA-TECDOC-1162, 2004, 206 p.
12. Kocher D.C. Dose-rate Conversion Factors for External Exposure to Photons and Electrons. NUREG/CR-1918, ORNL, 1981, 429 p.
13. Attestation passport for code VYBROS-3.1. Rostechnadzor, № 395, 16.07.2016, 6 p. (in Russian).
14. Creation of Data Bank of climate, topographic & demographic conditions of Bilibino NPP situation region. Report of Obninsk department of HTSNTU «ECOCENTER», 1990, 55 p. (in Russian).
15. RB-053-10. Specifications of accuracy increasing for calculation characterization of on-site and off-site radioactive contaminations and doses for staff and public. Rostehnadzor, 2010, 81 p. (in Russian).
16. RB-001-05. Guide to Content of Advanced Safety Analysis Report for NPP in work. Moscow. Rostehnadzor Publ., 2005, 74 p. (in Russian).
17. Deterministic Safety Analysis for Nuclear Power Plants. IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSG-2, STI/PUB/1428, IAEA, Vienna, 2009, 84 p.
18. Mukhamadeev R.I., Baranaev Yu.D., Parafilo L.M., Suvorov A.P. Analysis of severe accident of EGP-6 reactor facility at Bilibino NPP. Release source term formation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 1, pp. 99-111 (in Russian).
19. NRB-99/2009. SanPiN 2.6.1.2523-09. Radiation Safety Guide. Moscow. Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2009, 107 p. (in Russian).
20. RB-094-14. Guide to Emergency planning: How to minimize radiation consequences for staff and public due to accidents on different types of reactors of NPP. Optimization of protective actions. Moscow. Rostehnadzor Publ., 2014, 45 p. (in Russian).
21. MR 2.6.1.0063-12. Monitoring of doses for public near radiation object under normal maintainnance and accident conditions. Moscow. Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2013, 57 p. (in Russian).