+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="10"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/02/10.pdf"
first_page="101"
last_page="113"
udc="621.039.548"
title="A technique for detection of fuel failures by the activity of XE radionuclides during WWER reactor operation"
original_title="Методика выявления разгерметизации твэлов по активности радионуклидов Xe во время работы реакторов ВВЭР"
authors=["KalinichevPM", "EvdokimovIA", "LikhanskijVV"]
tags=["WWER", "fuel rod", "fuel failure", "fission product", "technique", "coolant activity", "iodine radionuclide", "radioactive noble gases"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.10"

+++

Fuel failures during operation of Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) may lead to
substantial economic losses. Negative effects of reactor operation with leaking fuel
in the core may be reduced if fuel failures are detected in timely manner.

Currently, the value of the ratio of normalized release rates for 131I and 134I is
used for detecting fuel failures during steady state operation of WWER reactors.
However, unequivocally establishing fuel failure based on the activity of iodine
radionuclides is not possible in all possible cases. Such situation may occur in the
case of small defects of fuel cladding of the leaking fuel rod or under high fuel
burnup if the defect is overlapped by the surface of the fuel pellet. If such case
fuel holdups can make the dominant contribution in iodine radionuclide activity,
and the fuel cladding failure may be indistinguishable against the background
activity level.

The technique for detection of fuel failures at WWER reactors by activity of
radioactive noble gases in the primary coolant is suggested in the present paper.
It is shown that radioactive noble gases may serve as the indicator of fuel failures
more sensitive than the activity of reference iodine radionuclides. The suggested
criterion for detection of fuel failures is based on monitoring the ratio between
133Xe and 135Xe activities. Some examples of practical applications of the developed
methodology are given.

### References

1. Shumkova N. Yu., Bykov O.V., Belousova L.P. Ukrainian WWER-type NPP units. Results of cladding tightness inspection. IAEA-TECDOC-1345, 2003, pp. 77-86.
2. Burman D.L. Development of a coolant activity evaluation model & related application experience. Proc. Int. Top. Mtg «LWR Fuel Performance».Paris, 1991, v. 1, p. 363.
3. Beyer C.E. An analytical model for estimating the number and size of defected fuel rods in an operating reactor. Proc. Int. Top. Mtg «LWR Fuel Performance». Paris, 1991, v. 2, p. 437.
4. Parrat D., Genin G.B., Musante Y., Petit C., Harrer J. Failed rod diagnosis and primary circuit contamination level determination, thanks to the DIADEME code. IAEATECDOC1345, 2003, pp. 265-276.
5. El-Jaby A., Lewis B.J., Thompson W.T., Iglesias F. and Ip M. A General Model for Predicting Coolant Activity Behaviour for Fuel-failure Monitoring Analysis. J. Nucl. Mater., 2010, v. 399, pp. 87-100.
6. Likhanski V., Evdokimov I., Khoruzhii O., Sorokin A., Novikov V. Modelling of Fission Product Release from Defective Fuel under WWER Operation Conditions and in Leakage Tests During Refuelling. Proc. Int. Top. Mtg LWR Fuel Performance, Florida, 2004, pp. 798-812.
7. Oliver Lena, Svensson Peter, Bishop Kendal, Westinghouse O.P. Fission product analysis using the FPA code. Proc. Int. Westhinghouse Electric Sweden AB, 2017, pp. 2-3.
8. Slavyagin P., Lusanova L., Miglo V. Fuel failure diagnostics in normal operation of nuclear power plants with WWER-type reactors. IAEATECDOC1345, 2003, pp. 303-315.
9. RD JeO 1.1.2.10.0521-2009 «Sborki teplovydeljajushhie jadernyh reaktorov tipa VVJeR-1000. Tipovaja metodika kontrolya germetichnosti obolochek teplovydelyayushhih elementov» s Izm. №2. Moscow. AO «Koncern Rosjenergoatom» Publ., 2016, pp. 28-34 (in Russian).
10. Review of fuel failures in water cooled reactors in 2006-2015. The IAEA nuclear energy series, 2018, pp. 43-45.
11. Slavyagin P., Lusanova L., Miglo V. Regulation of the fission product activity in the primary coolant and assessment of defective fuel rod characteristics in steady state WWER-type reactor operation. IAEATECDOC1345, 2003, pp. 326-337.
12. Wise C. The transport of short-lived fission products close to the fuel surface. J. Nucl. Mater. 1988, v. 152, pp. 102-113.
13. White R.J. The fractal nature of the surface of uranium dioxide: a resolution of short-lived/stable 1. gas release dichotomy. J. Nucl. Mater. 2001, v. 295, pp. 133-148.
14. Olander D.R. Fundamental aspects of nuclear reactor fuel elements. Berkeley. Department of nuclear engineering University of California, 1976, 624 p.
15. Wise C. Recoil release of fission products from nuclear fuel. J. Nucl. Mater. 1985, v. 136, pp. 30-47.
16. Turnbull J.A. and Friskney C.A. The diffusion coefficients of gaseous and volatile species during the irradiation of uranium dioxide. J. Nucl. Mater. 1982, v. 107, pp. 168-184.
17. Rossiter G., White R. The Fission Gas Diffusion Coefficient in Irradiated Oxide Fuel: An Analysis of Current Experimental Data. Proc. Enlarged Halden Programme Group Meeting, Storefjell, 2002.
18. Tasaka Kanj, Katakura Junichi, Ihara Hitosh, Yoshida Tadashi, Iijima Shungo, Nakashima Ryuzo, Nakagawa Tsuneo, Takano Hideki JNDC nuclear data library of fission products; version 2. JAERI. 1990, no. 1320, pp. 92-96.