+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="11"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/02/11.pdf"
first_page="114"
last_page="126"
udc="621.039.584"
title="The SIMCO containment code applied to modeling hydrogen distribution in containments of nuclear power facilities"
original_title="Контейнментный код SIMCO в приложении к моделированию распространения водорода в защитных оболочках объектов атомной энергетики"
authors=["DorovskikhVI", "DorokhovichSL", "ZajtsevAA", "LevchenkoVA", "LeonovIN"]
tags=["SIMCO code", "lumped parameter model", "analytical test", "verification", "hydrogen distribution"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.11"

+++

The general description of the SIMCO code developed for modeling of thermo-hydraulic and physical and chemical processes in the containment is submitted. The calculation procedure on the basis of physical and mathematical model in the lumped parameters is presented. Lumped parameters codes are based on the fundamental assumption that within a chosen volume, called a control volume, spatial differences of thermohydraulic variables – like fluid density, concentration and temperature – are neglected. While only the time-dependent behaviour is represented in conservation equations that describe containment transport processes. As a numerical method the modified semi-implicit SIMPLER procedure is used. Testing of a code on the basis of analytical and qualitative tests is held. A good agreement of calculation and analytical solution is obtained for the analytical test.

Verification of a code on the experimental data obtained at the NUPEC installation (Japan) is executed. ISP-35 – hydrogen mixing and distribution test M-7-1, performed by Nuclear Power Engineering Corporation (NUPEC, Japan). NUPEC’s hydrogen mixing and distribution test, M-7-1, was conducted as a part of the Proving Test on the Reliability for Reactor Containment Vessel Project. The NUPEC model containment at the Tadotsu Engineering Laboratory consists of a one-quarter linearly scaled PWR dry, insulated steel containment vessel with a free volume of 1300 m3. The purpose of the hydrogen mixing and distribution test, part of the program to evaluate containment integrity, was to investigate hydrogen distribution phenomena in a model containment and to validate analysis codes.

By results of testing and verification it is possible to draw a conclusion that in general physical and mathematical models of a code rather adequately describe processes of a heat-mass transfer in protective shells. In this regard this version of the SIMCO code can be used for the analysis of set of thermo-physical and chemical processes in the containments and protective shells of nuclear power facilities, including steam-air-hydrogen mixtures distribution.

### References

1. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mitigation of hydrogen hazards in water cooled power reactors, IAEA-TECDOC-1196. Vienna, 2001, 42 p.
2. Kirillov I.A., Kharitonova N.L., Sharafutdinov R.B., Khrennikov N.N. Hydrogen safety for nuclear power plants with light water reactor units. Current state of the problem. Yadernaja i radiatsionnaja bezopasnost’. 2017, no. 2(84), pp. 26-37 (in Russian).
3. Shapiro Z.M., Moffette T.R. Hydrogen Flammability Data and Application to PWR LOCA, WAPD-SC-545, Westinghouse Electric Corp. – Bettis Plant, Pittsburgh, 1957. 23 p.
4. Soldatov G.E., Golodnova O.S. On ways to reduce the risk of fires in turbine halls of nuclear power plants. Atomcon. 2009, no. (3), pp. 42-46 (in Russian).
5. Zaitsev A.A. Thermohydraulic substantiation of NPP containments with VVER. Autoref. Cand. tech. sci. diss. Obninsk, SSC RF IPPE, 2005, 10 p. (in Russian).
6. Levchenko V.A. Real)time modeling of dynamic processes of NPP power units. Autoref. Cand. tech. sci. diss. Obninsk, IATE, 2007, 21 p. (in Russian).
7. Gauntt R.O., Cole R.K., Erickson C.M. MELCOR Computer Code Manuals, NUREG/CR-6119, SAND2001-0929P. Sandia National Labs, Albuquerque, NM 87185-0739, 2001, 231 p.
8. Murata K.K. Code Manual for CONTAIN 2.0: A Computer Code for Nuclear Reactor Containment Analysis, Rep. NUREG/CR-6533, Rep. SAND97-1735, Sandia Natl Labs, NM, 1997, 388 p.
9. Povilaitis M., Kacegavicius T., and Urbonavicius E. Simulation of the ICE P1 test for a validation of COCOSYS and ASTEC codes. Fusion Engineering and Design, 2015, v. 94, no. 1, pp. 42-47.
10. Patankar S. Numerical methods for solving problems of heat transfer and fluid dynamics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984. – 152 p. (in Russian).
11. Launder R.E. Heat and Mass Transport Turbulence. Topics in Applied Physics. Berlin: Springer, 1976, 232p.
12. Samarskij A.A., Nikolaev E.S. Methods for solving grid equations. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1978, 592 p. (in Russian).
13. Bubenchikov A.M., Kharlamov S.N. Mathematical models of inhomogeneous anisotropic turbulence in internal flows. Tomsk. TSU Publ., 2001, 448 p. (in Russian).
14. Landau L.D., Lifshits E.M. Hydrodynamics. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1988, 736 p. (in Russian).
15. KUPOL-M code. Ver. 1.10. Program description. Report № 82022/4. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2002. 42 p. (in Russian).
16. Gupta S., Schmidt E., von Laufenberg B., Freitag M., Poss G., Funke F., Weber G. THAI test facility for experimental research on hydrogen and fission product behavior in light water reactor containments. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2015, v. 294, pp. 183-201.
17. NUPEC Hydrogen Mixing and Distribution Test (Test M-7-1), Final Comparison Report on ISP-35, NEA/CSNI/R(94)29, December 1994. 109 p.
18. Valencia L., Schrammel D., Cron T., Wolf L. Design Report, Hydrogen Distribution Experiments El1.1-E11.5, PHDR Working Report No. 10.004/89, August 1992, 95 p.