+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="12"
file="pdf/2018/02/2018-2-article-12.pdf"
first_page="127"
last_page="136"
udc="538.971"
title="The calculation of the neutron-protective characteristics of polymeric composite material"
original_title="Расчет нейтронозащитных характеристик полимерного композиционного материала"
authors=["CherkashinaNI", "PavlenkoAV"]
tags=["nuclear reactor", "biological protection", "titanium hydride", "polyalkaneimide", "neutron shielding characteristics", "flexural strength", "heat resistance", "shearing cross section", "relaxation length"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.12"

+++

The paper presents data on the evaluation of neutron shielding properties of composite material based on polyalkaneimide matrix and fine titanium hydride. Data on the principal physical mechanical characteristics of the composite, on the average values of temperature coefficient of linear expansion, on thermal conductivity of samples under normal conditions and at elevated temperatures and flexural strength at bending temperature are provided. It was established that composition containing 70% by mass of titanium hydride filler is optimal according to its physical mechanical characteristics. It was demonstrated that introduction of titanium hydride in the composite solves the problem of changing geometrical parameters of the material when exposed to elevated temperatures, because the average value of thermal linear expansion factor of the composites ranges from 15⋅10–6 to 18.8⋅10–6 K–1, which is comparable with the values of thermal linear expansion factor equal to (10 – 15)⋅10–6 K–1for steel elements of structure of transportation packaging sets used at nuclear power plants. Neutron removal cross-sections and relaxation lengths theoretically calculated for flux density of fast neutrons with neutron energies exceeding 2 MeV were evaluated as the neutron-shielding characteristics of the developed composites. It was established that the main element in the composite determining the neutron removal cross-section and relaxation length for fast neutron flux density (with neutron energies E > 2 MeV) is hydrogen despite its low concentrations (less than 5% in composite). Remaining elements in the composition make much smaller contribution in the neutron-shielding properties of the composite. Analysis of the calculated results showed high neutron-absorbing properties of the proposed formulas of the developed composite.

### References

1. Pavlenko V.I., Yastrebinskii R.N., Matyukhin P.V., Voronov D.V. Interaction of fast electrons and gamma-quanta with radiation protection ferric oxide composites. Russian Physics Journal. 2008, v. 51, pp. 1188-1194.
2. Lelekov V.I. Protection of personnel of the nuclear power plant from the emissions of the nuclear reactor. Moscow. MGOU Publ., 2010, 52 p. (in Russian).
3. Samarin А. Use of concrete as a biological shield from ionising radiation. Energy and Environmental Engineering. 2013, no. 1(2), pp. 90-97.
4. SanPiN 2.6.2523-09 Norms of radiation safety NRB-99/2009, 2009 (in Russian).
5. Medvedev Yu.A., Metelkin E.V., Truhanov G. Ya. The deceleration of neutrons in the presence of inelastic scattering. Atomnaya energiya. 1976, v. 41, no 1, pp. 105-107 (inRussian).
6. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N. Heavy neutron moderators for nuclear reactors: about their neutron-physical potential. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2015, v. 6, no 3-4, pp. 117 (in Russian).
7. Alfimova N.I., Pirieva S.Y., Fedorenko A.V., Sheychenko M.S., Vishnevskaya Ya.Yu. Current trends in the development of radiation-protective materials science. Vestnik Belgorodskogo gosudarstvennogo tehnologicheskogo universiteta im. V.G. Shukhova. 2017, no. 4, pp. 20-25 (in Russian).
8. Gann A.V., Gann V.V., Pugachev G.D., Shapoval I.I. Calculation of the biological protection of a neutron source controlled by an electron accelerator. VANT, Ser. «Yaderno-fizicheskie issledovaniya». 2012, no. 4(80), pp. 199-201 (in Russian).
9. Batten A.W.C. Effects of Irradiation on the Strength of Concrete, United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, Harwell, 1960.
10. Bashter I.I. Calculation of radiation attenuation coefficients for shielding concrete. Annals of nuclear energy, 1997, v. 24, no. 17, pp. 1389-1401.
11. Pavlenko V.I., Matyukhin P.V. Metal-concrete composite material on basis of highly dispersed oxide of iron and metallic aluminium. Stroitel’nye Materialy. 2005, iss. 8, pp. 46-48.
12. Iida T., Taniuchi H., Fujisawa K.Highly effective neutron shielding for transport/storage packaging. International journal of radioactive materials transport. 1991, v. 2, no. 1-3, pp. 79-85.
13. Muta H., Tanaka T., Ohishi Y., Kurosaki K., Hishinuma K., Yamanaka S., Muroga T. Properties of cold-pressed metal hydride materials for neutron shielding in a D-T fusion reactor. Plasma and Fusion Research: Regular Articles. 2015, v. 10, pp. 3405021-1 – 3405021-4.
14. Kalugina E.V., Gumargalieva K.Z., Zaikov G.E. Polyalkanimides. St. Petersburg. Scientific foundations and technologies Publ., 2008. 262 p. (in Russian).
15. Borovkov V.V., Briskman B.A., Dubrovina A.S. Radiation resistance of organic materials. Handbook. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986. 272 p. (in Russian).
16. Pavlenko V.I., Jastrebinskij R.N. Kuprieva O.V., Jastrebinskaja A.V., Matjuhin P.V. Method of applying borosilicate coating on titanium hydride. Patent RF, no. 2572271, 2015 (in Russian).
17. Zemfira T., Milanovskiy E. The contact angle of wetting of the solid phase of soil before and after chemical modification. Eurasian Journal of Soil Science. 2008, v. 4, pp. 191-197.
18. Marinova K.G., Christova D., Tcholakova S., Efremov E., Denkov N.D. Hydrophobization of Glass Surface by Adsorption of Poly (dimethylsiloxane). Langmuir. 2005, v. 21, pp. 11729-11737.
19. Program ANISN. User’s Guide. Moscow. IAYe im. I.V. Kurchatova Publ., 1981, 36 p. (in Russian).
20. Pavlenko V.I., Cherkashina N.I., Noskov A.V., Yastrebinskij R.N., Sokolenko I.V. Сalculation of gamma photon propagation processes in a composite material. Russian Physics Journal. 2016, v. 59, no. 8, pp. 1192-1197.
21. Chernicov A.M., Tamarov V.A., Barannikov E.A. Estimation of the probability of collision of an asteroid with ground by the Monte Carlo method. Izvestiya vysshikh uchebnykh zavedenij. Fizika. 2016, v. 59, no. 5, pp. 84-91 (in Russian).
22. Pavlenko V.I., Edamenko O.D., Cherkashina N.I., Noskov A.V. Total energy losses of relativistic electrons passing through a polymer composite. Journal of Surface Investigation: X5Ray, Synchrotron and Neutron Techniques. 2014, v. 8, no. 2, pp. 398-403.
23. Matyukhin P.V., Pavlenko V.I., Yastrebinsky R.N., Cherkashina N.I. The high-energy radiation effect on the modified iron-containing composite material. Middle East Journal of Scientific Research. 2013, v. 17, no. 9, pp. 1343-1149.