+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/02/13.pdf"
first_page="137"
last_page="145"
udc="681.5.08: 621.039.578: 629.7"
title="The modern information-measuring complex for investigations and tests of thermionic heat to electricity converters"
original_title="Современный информационноизмерительный комплекс для проведения исследований и испытаний термоэмиссионных преобразователей тепловой энергии в электрическую"
authors=["KirillovAS", "YaryginVI"]
tags=["thermionic converter", "information-measuring complex", "current-voltage characteristic", "thermocouples", "pulsed mode"]
rubric = "Methods"
rubric_name = "Physics and methods for direct conversion of nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.13"

+++

A thermionic nuclear power plant (TNPP) is one of promising power sources for spacecrafts for various purposes. There are investigations and tests to determine characteristics of TNPP. The first test is the out-of-reactor test of laboratory thermionic converters (TIC) with flat and cylindrical geometry of electrodes on stands equipped by an automated information-measuring complex (IMC). The IMC carries out the following functions: measuring of TIC current-voltage characteristics (CVC) together with temperature fields in an experimental facility, preliminary data processing, displaying on a computer monitor screen in real-time and data logging on the operator request. The paper presents the structure and characteristics of the IMC developed on the basis of ICP DAS products. A PCI-1602F card is used to measure current and voltage of TIC, and I-7000 modules are used to measure thermocouple signals. The designed program for CVC measuring provides an operator with convenient graphical interface and the ability to change measurement parameters. Errors of CVC measuring are defined during test measurements by using TIC imitators. The developed IMC provides enhanced functionality in measuring of signals of thermocouples in an experimental facility. The measurement error in the diffusion part of the VAC (with TIC current less than 3 A) with a TIC imitator is less than 1%. The structure of IMC allows simple upgrades such as increasing of number of measuring channels and adding of modules from another vendor. Operating experience of this IMC will be used in the design of an IMC for a reactor testing facility to perform similar functions.

### References

1. Yarygin V.I. Nuclear power of direct energy conversion in space missions of XXI century. Izvestiya Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 2, pp. 5-20 (in Russian).
2. Kuznecov V.A. Nuclear Reactors for Space Power plants. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1977, 240 p. (in Russian).
3. Yarygin V.I., Rujnikov V.A., Sinyavsky V.V. Space and Terrestrial Nuclear Power Plants of Direct Energy Conversion. Moscow. NRNU «MEPhI» Publ., 2016, 364 p. (in Russian).
4. Polous M.A., Yarygin V.I., Vinogradov E.G. Software for three-dimensional numerical calculation of thermal and electrical characteristics of the multi-cell thermionic fuel element for thermionic NPP. Izvestiya Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 2, pp. 151-160 (in Russian).
5. Yarygin V.I. Physical Basis of Thermionic Conversion. Part 2. Methods of Investigation, Measurement Technique of Characteristics and Tests of Electrode Materials. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2006, 64 p. (in Russian).
6. Andriashin A.V., Meleta E.A, Mironov V.S., Yarygin V.I. The Basic Complex of Hardware, Methodical and Software Tools for Experimental Research of Laboratory TIC. Selected works of IPPE. Obninsk. IPPE Publ., 1996, pp. 69-76 (in Russian). Investigations and Tests of TIC (Device 0100) in Support of Characteristics of Unified TFE. The results of scientific-technical activities of the Institute of nuclear reactors and thermophysics for 2011. Scientific and technical collection. Obninsk. IPPE Publ., 2012, pp. 404-409 (in Russian).
8. Sinyavskij V.V. Methods and Tools for Experimental Investigations and Reactor Tests of Thermionic Power Generating Assemblies. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2000, 375 p. (in Russian).
9. Denisenko V.V. Computer Control of Technological Process, Experiment, Equipment. Moscow. Goryachaya liniya – Telekom Publ., 2009, 608 p. (in Russian).
10. Shirjaev V.V. Computer Measuring Tools. Tomsk, Tomsky Politehnichesky Universitet Publ., 2009, 180 p. (in Russian).
11. Vinogradov E.G., Mironov V.S., Smolnikova G.I. The data bank of current-voltage characteristics of the thermionic converter. Atomnaya energiya, 2000, v. 89, iss. 1, pp. 71-74 (in Russian).
12. Vinogradov E.G., Mironov V.S., Petrovskij V. G., Yarygin V.I. The computer database of TFE CVC. Atomnaya energiya, 2001, v. 91, iss. 4, p. 315 (in Russian).
13. Pyatnickij A.P, Sergeev D.N., Nevezhin O.A. Current-voltage Characteristics of Thermionic Converters. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1967, 151 p. (in Russian).
14. The site of ICP DAS company. Available at: http://www.icpdas.com/ (accessed Sep. 1, 2017) (in Russian).
15. Grafkin A.V., Ioffe V.G. The Architecture of Measurement Systems on the Base of I-7000 Modules of ICP DAS. Samara. Samarsky Gosudarstvennyj Aerokosmicheskij Universitet Publ., 2009, 160 p. (in Russian).
16. Kolpakov A.I. Resistive current shunts for high power applications. Komponenty i tehnologii, 2010, no. 3, pp. 84-88 (in Russian).
17. Arnoldov M.N., Karzhavin V.A., Trofimov A.I. The Basics of Metrological Support for Temperature Control of Reactor Facilities. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2012, 243 p. (in Russian).
18. Rannev G.G. Intelligent Measuring Tools. Moscow. Akademiya Publ., 2010, 272 p. (in Russian).
19. Kirillov A.S., Agafonov V.R. Intelligent thermocouple input modules for thermionic experimental facility. Nauchno-tekhnicheskiy vestnik Povolzh’ya, 2016, no. 3, pp. 65-68 (in Russian).
20. The site of Agilent Technologies company. Available at: http://www.agitech.ru/ (accessed Sep. 1, 2017) (in Russian).