+++

categories="article"
date="2018-06-22T00:08:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="14"
file="pdf/2018/02/2018-2-article-14.pdf"
first_page="146"
last_page="156"
udc="004.4’242"
title="Verification of applied programs generation and loading for safety systems of nuclear power plants based on a reverse-engineering method"
original_title="Верификация процедур генерации и загрузки прикладных программ систем безопасности атомных электростанций методом обратного преобразования"
authors=["BelonosovMA", "KishkinVL", "KorolevSA"]
tags=["verification", "reverse engineering", "code generation", "safety systems", "microcontroller", "mathematical model", "instrumentation tools"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.14"

+++

The article describes the automatic verification method used for application software of digital safety systems based on the TPTS-SB equipment. Verification is performed by comparing two mathematical models (oriented graphs): one obtained by processing the original design data, i.e., graphical functional diagrams, and the other formed by reversing the applied program code downloaded from the microcontroller. The vertices in both graphs are the functional blocks of mathematical and logical operations, while the edges are the connections between them. Over the constructed mathematical models, a comparison procedure is performed: the vertices and edges of the graphs are compared as well as the parameters of the graph vertices. The equivalence of mathematical models is the proof of the correspondence between the program code and the initial set of design functional diagrams.

The proposed automatic verification method makes it possible to prove that no distortion is introduced into the program during the process of converting graphical functional diagrams to the program code with its subsequent translation and loading into the microcontroller. It is postulated that any distortions will be detected during the verification procedure, which is regularly performed every time after loading the code into the microcontroller.

The solution also provides an acceptable speed when processing large volumes of vector graphics stored in a relational database, and makes it possible to visualize the verification results. The proposed method is implemented in the GET-R1 instrumentation tools for TPTS-SB and is used in designing and verifying the application software of the security systems at the Belarusian NPP.

### References

1. Belonosov M.A., Galitsyn Y.S., Krajushkin U.V., Zhukov I.M., Gritsenko S.Y. The end-to-end engineering tools for instrumentation and control systems for nuclear power plants’. Reports of BSUIR. 2015, v. 2, no. 88, pp. 47-51 (in Russian).
2. International Electrotechnical Comission, Standard IEC61131. 2003, v. 3, 226 p.
3. Zyubin V.E. PLC Programming: IEC 61131-3 languages and possible alternatives. Promyshlennye ASU i kontrollery. 2005, v. 11, pp. 31-35 (in Russian).
4. Timohin D.S., Gricenko S.Yu.,. Artem’ev K.P. The structure of the automated process control system of the Belarusian NPP in terms of safety’. Reports of BSUIR. 2015, v. 2, no. 88, pp. 28-32 (in Russian).
5. Naritz A. D., Moiseev M. I., Novikov A. N., Karpov P. S., Borzenko A. A. The complex of automation system TPTS-SB. Reports of BSUIR. 2015, v. 2, no. 88, pp. 38-42 (in Russian).
6. Tarjan R. Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms. XII-th Annu. Symp. Switch. Autom. Theory (swat 1971). 1971, v. 1, no. 2, pp. 146-160 (in Russian).
7. Filatova N.N. Structural synthesis of automation schemes in conditions of incomplete requirements for technical implementation. Izvestiya VolGTU. 2012, v. 4, no. 13, pp. 17-22 (in Russian).
8. Miedl H. Retrans – a tool to verify the functional equivalence of automatically generated source code with its specification. Probabilistic Safety Assessment and Management (PSAM-III). Crete, Greece, 1996, pp. 137-147.
9. Baburin D.E. Hierarchical approach for automatic allocation of acyclic graphs. Available at: http://www.iis.nsk.su/files/articles/sbor_kas_09_baburin.pdf (accessed Feb 2, 2018) (in Russian).
10. Spоnemann M., Hanxleden R., H. Fuhrmann D. I. On the automatic layout of data flow diagrams. Arbeit. 2009.
11. Zverkov V.V. Program-Technical Complexes of Control Systems for Safety of Nuclear Power Plants’. Elektricheskie stantsii. 2017, no. 1, pp. 2-10 (in Russian).
12. Bozhenkov O.L. System engineering of the automated process control system of NPPs. Yadernye izmeritel’no(informacionnye tehnologii. 2009, no. 2, pp. 27-30 (in Russian).
13. Zverkov V.V. Analysis of approaches to the construction of automated process control systems of NPPs. Electricheskie Stantsii. 2015, no. 8, pp. 2-6 (in Russian).
14. Korolev S., Tolokonsky А., Rogov V. The optimal approach for the processes of verification and validation of NPP software and hardware complexes. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2017, v. 781, no. 1, pp. 8-89.
15. Dоunaev V.G., Korolev S.A. PCS of power units of nuclear power plants with VVER. In: Nuclear Power. Problems. Solutions. Part 1. Ed. M.N. Strikhanov. Moscow. TsSPiM Publ., 2011, pp. 315-356 (in Russian).
16. Zverkov V.V. Automated control system for technological processes of NPPs. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2014, 558 p. (in Russian).
17. IAEA, SSR-2/1. Safety of nuclear power plants: design. Specific safety requirements. Vienna. IAEA. 2012.
18. IEC 61513-2002. Nuclear power plants. Monitoring and control systems important for safety. General requirements. 2002.
19. IAEA, NS-G-1.1. The software of control systems, important for safety, executed on the basis of computer equipment. Safety Guide. Vienna. IAEA. 2000.
20. Control systems and protection of nuclear reactors. Ser. Safety of Nuclear Power Plants. Ed. M.A. Yastrebenetsky. Kiev. Osnova-Print Publ., 2011, 770 p. (in Russian).
21. Korolev S.A., Tolokonsky A.O., Rogov V.V. Modern methods of verification of software and hardware complexes of automated process control systems of nuclear power plants based on TPTS. Elektricheskie stantsii. 2016, no. 8. pp. 9-15 (in Russian).