+++

categories="article"
date="2015-10-23T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file="pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-04.pdf"
first_page="40"
last_page="48"
udc="621.039"
title="Photometry of ionizing radiations"
original_title="Фотометрия ионизирующих излучений"
authors=["KhryachkovVA", "ZhuravlevBV", "TalalaevVA"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.04"

+++

The opportunity of creation of system remote monitoring of radiation environment in given point was investigated and realized. The systems based on ability different mediums irradiate optical photons under influence of ionizing radiation. Low noise and high-aperture photon detector was developed. This detector is able to selectively detect light coming from given point. Detector is based on parabolic mirror and PMT with cooling photocathode. Using this equipment investigation of light output for air, quartz glass, Plexiglas and water under irradiation of alpha particles, beta particles and gamma rays was carrying out. It was shown that this type installation able to do remote monitoring of relatively low dose rate level. Working with air as passive radiator the best sensitivity of setup was reach for alpha particles and beta particles. For gamma rays we recommend to use quartz glass and Plexiglas radiators. Main advantages of this installation are: missing of cable lines between of sensors and light detector; simplicity and reliability of sensor; high radiation resistance of sensor; efficiency of control; possibility to control set of points by one system. Suggested technology for operative dosimetryc control allows automatizing of dose field measurement process and excluding risk of personal irradiation. Making installation can be useful for estimation of dosimetryc environment on the enterprises used nuclear technology at property-sheet mode and at accident accompanied by radioactive leakage.

### References

1. Zhemerev A.V., Stepanov B.M. Physics of pulse radiating excitation of a air luminescence. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 97 p. (in Russian).
2. Kakimoto F., Loh E.C., Nagano M., Okuno H., Teshima M., Ueno S. A measurement of the air fluorescence yields. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research. 1996, v. A372, pp. 527-533.
3. Catalano O., Agnetta G., Biondo B., Celi F., Di Raffaele R., Giarrusso S., Linsley J., La Rosa G., Lo Bue A., Mangano A., Russo F. The atmospheric nightglow in the 300-400 nm wavelength Results by the ballon-borne experiment BABY. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research. 2002, v. A480, pp.547-554.
4. Chistjakova L.K. Remote detection methods of radioactive anomalies in a ground atmosphere. Optics of an atmosphere and ocean. 2001,v. 14, no. 5, pp. 465-472 (in Russian).
5. Abramov A.I., Kazanskij Yu.A., Matusevich E.S. Basis of nuclear physics experimental methods. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ., 1970, 560 p. (in Russian).
6. Savel‘ev I.V. Course of the atomic physics. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1982, 496 p. (in Russian).