+++

categories="article"
date="2015-10-23T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2015-03"
issue_name="2015 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/03/08.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="84"
udc="621.039.526.034+621.039.546.8:536.24"
title="Experimental justification of choice operating channel imitator for hydrodynamic reactor model"
original_title="Экспериментальное обоснование выбора имитатора рабочего канала гидродинамической модели реактора"
authors=["AvdeevEF", "ChusovIA", "LevchenkoYuD", "YurievYuS"]
tags=["reactor facility", "pressure drop", "operation technological channel", "imitator channel", "thermohydraulic reactor core model", "reactor core", "reacto fuel assembly", "modeling scale", "geometrical distortion of model", "Euler number", "Reynolds number"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.3.08"

+++

The paper describes the methodology of experimental study for hydrodynamic characteristics of imitators channel model with two-loop reactor facility. From the experience of manufacturing of various reactor types model known that almost impossible to find a channel imitator with simple geometry, for which the dependence of the hydraulic losses would be equal to the corresponding dependence for a full-scale working process channel with fuel assemblies. Therefore, we can talk only about approximate simulation of hydraulic losses in operating channels with fuel assemblies and channels imitators in a limited range of Reynolds numbers and include all reflood flow regimes of coolant flow in the reactor predicted in design calculations.

During selection the final geometry of imitators channels autors proceed from few assumptions of approximate simulation for full scale flow path of operating channel by the channel of simplified geometry: 1) From preliminary physical and thermal computational studies known range of the coolant flow in the operating channel with fuel assembly at nominal condition of the reactor power; 2) Equality of Euler number at nominal condition of reflood flow regimes of reactor core and flow in a channel imitators. Exepiments have been conducted with three types of imitators then was chosen the most suitable. The final design of imitator channel is included high quality manufactured tube, two diaphragms and nozzle profiled by using Vitoshinsky method.

### References

1. Idel’chik I.E. Spravochnik po gidravlicheskim soprotivleniyam. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1975, 559 p. (in Russian).
2. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A., Ustyuzhanin A.Ya., Maksimovskiy V.V., Lazikyan D.S., Levchenko V.A., Borodastov S.V., Leonov I.N., Belugin V.A., Levchenko Yu.D., Yur’ev Yu.S. Gidravlicheskiy stend dlya ispytaniy modeley yadernyh reaktorov. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2004, no. 4, pp. 70– 83 (in Russian).
3. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A., Levchenko V.A., Levchenko Yu.D., Yur’ev Yu.S. Eksperimental’noe issledovanie gidravlicheskogo soprotivleniya modeli korpusnogo reaktora. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2005, no. 4, pp. 77 – 85 (in Russian).
4. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A., Belozerov V.I. Eksperimental’noe opredelenie gidravlicheskih harakteristik stenda «Tsirkulyatsionnaya petlya». VI mezhdunarodnaya konferentsiya Bezopasnost’ AES i podgotovka kadrov Tezisy dokladov 4-8 oktyabrya 1999g. Obninsk., -1999. - s.43.
5. Fomichev M.S. Eksperimental’naya gidrodinamika YaEU. M.: Energoatomizdat. – 1989. – 246 s.
6. Abramovich G.N. Turbulentnoe smeshenie gazovyh struy. M.: Nauka. – 1974. – 272 s.
7. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A., Levchenko V.A. Eksperimental’noe issledovanie gidravlicheskih harakteristik modifitsirovannoy TVS reaktora RBMK-1000. Izvestiya VUZov., Yadernaya energetika. -№3., -2005., -str. 69 – 80.
8. Abramovich G.N. Prikladnaya gazovaya dinamika, t.1, M.: Nauka, 1987. –537 s.