+++

categories="article"
date="2015-10-23T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2015-03"
issue_name="2015 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="10"
file="/pdf/2015/03/2015-03-article-10.pdf"
first_page="97"
last_page="105"
udc="621.039.517"
title="Fluid flow and heat transfer in fuel rods assembly with modified spacer grids"
original_title="Течение и теплоперенос в пучках стержневых твэлов водоохлаждаемых реакторов с модифицированными сотовыми дистанционирующими решетками"
authors=["KrapivtsevVG", "MarkovPV", "SoloninVI"]
tags=["spacer grid", "nuclear reactor core", "fuel rod", "intensification of coolant’s mixing", "secondary flows", "computational fluid dynamics"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.3.10"

+++

The paper considers the fluid flow and heat transfer in fuel rods assembly with modified spacer grids for light water nuclear reactors. Modified spacer grids are designed by «Mashinostroitel’nyj Zavod» (Electrostal’, Russia). Cells of modified spacer grids rotate stream by corrugations, angled to the axis of cells. It’s possible to generate different secondary flow downstream the grids by compilation of grids by cells with different direction of rotation (clockwise or counterclockwise). Two types of modified spacer grids are considered: spacer grid of first type consist of similar cells and generate secondary flow like «rotation around rod»; spacer grid of second type consist of different cells and generate horizontal secondary flow between rows of rods. Investigation was performed by methods of computational fluid dynamics. Results of numerical simulations were validated with data of physical experiments. The mechanisms of secondary flows generation are described. The values of pressure drop coefficient of modified spacer grids are given. The influence of flow conditions (Reynolds number) on values of pressure drop coefficient is described. The analysis of the intensification of coolant’s mixing by modified spacer grids with different boundary conditions is described too.The conclusion about possibility of application modified spacer grids to decrease temperature nonuniformity in coolant flow due to generation of secondary flow had been done.

### References

1. Eksperimental’noe obosnovanie teplogidravlicheskoj nadezhnosti reaktorov VVER (Experimental substantiation of thermal-hydraulic safety of VVER). Logvinov S.A., Bezrukov Yu.A., Dragunov Yu.G. Moscow. Akademkniga Publ., 2003, 157 p. (in Russian).
2. Perepelica N.I. Distancioniruyushhie reshyotki s lokal’nymi zavihritelyami dlya teplovydelyayuschih sborok PWR (Spacer grid with local swirls for the PWR fuel assemblies). Atomnaya tehnika za rubezhom, 2006, no. 1, pp. 3 – 7 (in Russian).
3. Perepelica N.I. Distancioniruyuschie reshyotki so smesitel’nymi lopatkami dlya teplovydelyayuschih sborok PWR (Spacer grid with mixing vanes for the PWR fuel assemblies). Atomnaya tehnika za rubezhom, 2006, no. 2, pp. 3 – 8 (in Russian).
4. Sposob i ustrojstvo peremeshivaniya teplonositelya v teplovydelyayuschih sborkah yadernogo reaktora (method and apparatus mixing a coolant in the fuel assembly of a nuclear reactor): patent 2391725 Rossijskaya Federaciya. Ryzhov S.B., Mohov V.A., Vasil’chenko I.N., Kobalev S.N., V’jalicyn V.V., Mal’chevskij D.V. zayavitel’ i patentoobladatel’ OAO «OKB Gidropress». – № 2008138412/06; zayavl. 29.09.2008; opubl. 10.06.2010 (in Russian).
5. Eksperimental’nye issledovaniya effektivnosti peremeshivaniya teplonositelya v obosnovanie vybora optimal’noj konstrukcii TVSA dlya vnedreniya v reaktory tipa VVER (Experimental studies of the effectiveness of the coolant mixing in the rationale for the selection of optimal design TVSA for introduction into the reactors VVER). Dmitriev S.M., Borodin S.S., Ershov A.N., Legchanov M.A., Nyrkov D.A., Solncev D.N., Hrobostov A.E. Izvestia vysshih uchebnyh zavedenij. Yadernaya energetika, 2009, no. 1, pp. 88 – 97 (in Russian).
6. Struktura reshyotki dlya teplovydelyayuschej sborki yadernogo reaktora (Lattice structure for a fuel assembly of a nuclear reactor): patent 2389091 Rossijskaya Federaciya. Babenko Ju.N., Vereshhak V.G., Ivanov A.V., Odincov N.V., Petrov I.V., Cirin S.I., Perepelica N.I., Pomet’ko R.S., Solonin V.I. zayavitel’ i patentoobladatel’ OAO «Mashinostroitel’nyj zavod». – № 2008145619/06; zayavl. 19.11.2008; opubl. 10.05.2010 (in Russian).
7. Organizaciya konvektivnogo perenosa v puchke tvelov za sotovymi reshyotkami dlya vodo-vodyanyh energeticheskih reaktorov (Organization of convective transport in the fuel bundle for cell spacer grids for VVER). Krapivcev V.G, Solonin V.I., Cirin S.I. Izvestija vysshih uchebnyh zavedenij. Mashinostroenie, 2011, no.4, pp. 7 – 12 (in Russian).
8. Intensifikacija peremeshivanija v TVS vodoohlazhdaemyh reaktorov sotovymi peremeshivajushhimi reshetkami (Intensification of coolant’s mixing in fuel assemblies of water cooled reactor by mixing grids) / Markov P.V. Izvestia vysshih uchebnyh zavedenij. Yadernaya energetika, 2012, no. 1, pp. 117 – 125 (in Russian).
9. STAR-CCM+, version 9.04. UserGuide, CD-adapco Group, 2014.