+++

categories="article"
date="2015-10-23T01:14:53+03:00"
issue="2015-03"
issue_name="2015 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file="pdf/2015/03/2015-03-article-11.pdf"
first_page="106"
last_page="114"
udc="621.039"
title="Researches of hydrodynamic characteristics of coolant in VVER-1000 reactor mixed core of atomic power station «Temelin»"
original_title="Экспериментальные исследования гидродинамических характеристик потока теплоносителя в смешанной активной зоне реактора ВВЭР-1000 АЭС «Темелин»"
authors=["DmitrievSM", "DoronkovDV", "PolozkovaEN", "ProninAN", "SorokinVD", "KhrobostovAE"]
tags=["core", "FA", "spacer and mixing grids", "interassembly interaction", "coolant hydrodynamics"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.3.11"

+++

Results of researches of interassembly interaction of coolant flow in VVER-1000 core of Atomic Power Station «Temelin». Study of coolant flow process in fuel element bundle FA has been carried out on an aerodynamic experimental rig. VVER-1000 core fragment which consists of FA-12 PLUS and FA-T with stiffening angles and interassembly gap has been chosen as a model to receive more detailed information on hydrodynamic characteristics of coolant flow. Investigations of hydrodynamic characteristics of coolant have been consisted in measuring coolant flow velocity vector as in characteristic zones areas of FA, as in interassembly gap by means of the five-channel pneumometric probe. An analysis of spatial distribution of absolute velocity flow projections allowed to specificate pattern (picture) of flow-past spacer and mixing grids and combined spacer grids of FA, to determine realization zones of maximum cross-flow of coolant, depth of disturbance passage and redistribution of coolant rate in neighboring assemblies of FA. Investigation results of interassembly interaction of coolant between neighboring FAs are used in Afrikantov OKBM JSC to specify methods of hydraulic design VVER-1000 cores and have been included in a data-base for verifying CFD codes (Computation Fluid Dynamics) and for detailed cell-wise calculation VVER-1000 reactor cores.

### References

1. Dmitriev S.M., Zverev D.L., Byh O.A., Panov Ju.K., Sorokin N.M., Farafonov V.A. Osnovnoe oborudovanie AEHS s korpusnymi reaktorami na teplovyh nejtronah: uchebnik [The main equipment of nuclear power plants with a tank reactor with thermal neutrons]. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 2013 (in Russian).
2. Barinov A.A., Borodina V.E., Dmitriev S.M., Hrobostov A.E. K voprosu o metodologii obosnovaniya teplotekhnicheskoj nadezhnosti aktivnyh zon vodyanyh energeticheskih reaktorov [On the issue of core cooling reliability substantiation methodology for the pressurized water reactors]. Trudy Nizhegorodskogo gosudarstvennogo tehnicheskogo universiteta im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2014, no. 2, pp. 98-108 (in Russian).
3. Dmitriev S.M., Borodin S.S., Legchanov M.A., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Eksperimental’nye issledovaniya gidrodinamicheskih i massoobmennyh harakteristik potoka teplonositelya v TVSA VVER [Experimental studies of hydrodynamic and mass-transfer properties of coolant flow in VVER fuel assemblies TVSA]. Atomnaya energiya. 2012, v. 113 (5), pp. 252-257 (in Russian).
4. Dmitriev S.M., Varencov A.V., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Samojlov O.B., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Raschyotno-ehksperimental’nye issledovaniya lokal’noj gidrodinamiki i massoobmena potoka teplonositelya v TVS-Kvadrat reaktorov PWR s peremeshivayuschimi reshyotkami [Combined numerical and experimental investigations of local hydrodynamics and coolant flow mass transfer in Kvadrat type fuel assemblies of PWR reactors with mixing grids]. Teploenergetika. 2014, no. 8, pp. 20-27 (in Russian).
5. Dmitriev S.M., Borodin S.S., Legchanov M.A., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Osobennosti lokal’noj gidrodinamiki i massoobmena teplonositelya v TVS reaktorov VVEHR i PWR s peremeshivayushchimi reshyotkami [Features of local hydrodynamics and mass exchange of the heat-carrier in fuel rod assemblies of VVER and PWR with mixing grids]. Teplovye processy v tehnike. Moscow. Nauka i Tehnologii Publ. 2013, v. 5(3), pp. 98-107.