+++

categories="article"
date="2015-10-23T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2015-03"
issue_name="2015 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="12"
file="/pdf/2015/03/2015-03-article-12.pdf"
first_page="115"
last_page="123"
udc="629.7"
title="Parametric analysis of space nuclear power plants in thermodynamic design variables"
original_title="Параметрический анализ космических ядерных энергетических установок в термодинамических проектных переменных"
authors=["YuferovAG", "LinnikVА", "NikolaevMA"]
tags=["space nuclear power plants", "parametric analysis", "sensitivity function", "criteria of technical level"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.3.12"

+++

The purpose of the work is to analyze the influence of the efficiency and the temperatures on a specific mass of space power plant and a specific area of cooler-radiator with taking into account the heat losses and mass subsystems. As a tool for parametric analysis the sensitivity function of the specific characteristics to a variation of design variables is used. It is shown that the sensitivity function can be used as a criterion defining the area of optimality and similarity of the SNPS different types. To specify allowable ranges of design variables the form of the specific characteristics with the clear interdependencies of the objective functions and design variables is proposed. These results demonstrate the uniextremal dependence of specific characteristics of the generalized design variables. It makes valid statement of optimization problem under these criteria of technical level SNPS.

### References

1. Kvasnikov L.A., Belik A.A. Vybor osnovnyh parametrov energeticheskoy ustanovki i ejo system [Selection of the main parameters of the power plant and its systems]. Moscow, MAI Publ. 1986. 50 p. (in Russian).
2. Romanov A.V. Teoriya kompleksnoy optimizacii proektirovaniya kosmicheskih apparatov s yadernymi termoemissionnymi energeticheskimi ustanovkami [The theory of complex optimization of the design of spacecraft with nuclear power plants thermionic]. SPb., NPO «Professional». 2010. 474 p.(in Russian).
3. Zabud’ko A.N., Linnik V.A., Raskach F.P. Sravnenie i analiz harakteristik termoemissionnyh reaktorov-preobrazovateley razlichnogo tipa dlja kosmicheskih YaEU: Preprint GNC RF-FEI-3025. [Comparison and analysis of a thermionic converter reactor for various types of space nuclear power]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2004 (in Russian).
4. Linnik V.A., Pupko V.Ya., Raskach F.P., Yuferov A.G. Metodika ocenki tehnicheskogo urovnja kosmicheskih YaEU: Preprint GNC RF-FEI-2115. [Methodology to evaluate the technical level of space nuclear power]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1990 (in Russian).
5. Kalafati D.D. Analiz parametrov termodinamicheskih ciklov kosmicheskih yadernyh energeticheskih ustanovok [Analysis of the parameters of thermodynamic cycles of space nuclear power plants]. Atomic Energy. 1967, v. 22, no. 6, pp. 432–439.
6. Kokorev L.S., Haritonov V.V. Teplogidravlicheskie raschety i optimizaciya yadernyh ener-geticheskih ustanovok [Thermal-hydraulic calculations and optimization of nuclear power plants]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1986. 248 p. (in Russian).
7. Yuferov A.G., Ovcharenko M.K., Bologov P.M. Teorija vozmushhenij pervogo porjadka v zadache organizacii variantnyh nejtronno-fizicheskih raschetov yadernyh reaktorov: Preprint GNC RF-FEI-2850. [First-order perturbation theory in the problem of the organization of neutron-physical calculations variants of nuclear reactors]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2000 (in Russian).
8. Yuferov A.G., Nikolaev M.A. Algoritmy organizacii variantnyh proektnyh raschetov [Algorithms for organization of the variant design calculations]. Nauchno-tehnicheskiy vestnik Povolzh’ya. 2013, no. 6, pp. 388-393 (in Russian).
9. Ionkin V.I. Neytronno-fizicheskie harakteristiki reaktorov kosmicheskih ustanovok. Avtoref. diss. dokt. tekhn. nauk [Neutron-physical characteristics of the reactor space installations. Dr. tech. sci. diss.]. Obninsk, 2001. 65 p. (in Russian).