+++

categories="article"
date="2015-10-23T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2015-03"
issue_name="2015 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="13"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/03/13.pdf"
first_page="124"
last_page="134"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Gas-cooled thorium reactor with fuel block of the unified design"
original_title="Газоохлаждаемый ядерный реактор с ториевым топливом на основе топливного блока унифицированной конструкции"
authors=["ShamaninIV", "BedenkoSV", "ChertkovYB", "GubaydulinIM"]
tags=["thorium", "gas-cooled thorium reactor", "fuel block a unified design", "calculation 3D-model"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.3.13"

+++

Scientific researches of new technological platform realization carried out in Russia currently are based on ideas of nuclear breeding the fuel in closed fuel cycle and physical principles of fast neutron reactors. Innovative projects of low-power reactor systems correspond to the new technological platform. High-temperature gas cooled thorium reactors with good transportability properties, small installation time and operation without overloading for a long time are considered perspective. Such small modular reactor systems at good commercial, competitive level are capable of creating the basis of the regional power industry of the Russian Federation. The analysis of information about application of thorium as fuel in reactor systems and its perspective use in the future is presented in the work. The results of the first stage of neutron-physical researches of a 3D-model of the high-temperature gas-cooled thorium reactor based on fuel block of the unified design are given. Calculation 3D-model was developed using MCU-5 program code contemporary Libraries of Evaluated Nuclear Data (ENDF/B-VII.0, JEFF-3.1.1, JENDL-4.0, ROSFOND, BROND, BNAB and other) and multigroup approximations. According to the comparison results of neutron-physical characteristics several optimum reactor core compositions were chosen. According to the comparison results of neutron-physical characteristics of the considered modifications several optimum reactor core compositions intended for creation of small modular nuclear plants with the capacity to 60 MW were chosen. The selected calculation modifications refer to the reactor with large and small reactor cores with fuel assemblies containing Pu and Th in equal amounts. The reactivity margin with the larger reactor core is equal to ~21,1%, and the life-time is 510 effective days. The results of calculations of the reactivity margin, neutron flux and power density distribution in the core are presented in the work.

### References

1. Orlov V.V., Filin A.I., Smirnov V.S. et al. Bystryj reaktor estestvennoj bezopasnosti so svincovym teplonositelem dlja krupnomasshtabnoj jadernoj jenergetiki [Fast Reactor natural safety with lead coolant for large-scale nuclear power]. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 2001. 221 p. (in Russian).
2. Zhukov A.V., Kuzina Ju.A., Belozerov V.I. Reaktory s tjazhelym teplonositelem i nekotorye teplogidravlicheskie dannye dlja nih [Reactors with Heavy Liquid-Metal Coolants and Some Thermohydraulic Data for them]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2011, no 3, pp. 100-112 (in Russian).
3. Kiryushin A.I., Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N., Glushkov E.S.Project of the GM-MHR high-temperature helium reactor with gas turbine. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1997, v. 173, pp. 119-129.
4. Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N., Abrosimov N.G., Vasyaev A.V., Ganin M.E., Golovko V.F., Zverev D.L., Kodochigov N.G., Petrunin V.V. Similarity of high-temperature gas-cooled reactor technologies and designs in Russia and USA. Atomic Energy. 2010, v. 108, no 2, pp. 89-96.
5. Ponomarev-Stepnoy N., Kodochigov N., Sukharev Yu., Marova E., Glushkov E., Fomichenko P. Neutronic Features of the GT-MHR Reactor. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2003, v. 222, pp. 161-171.
6. Seker V., Сolak U. HTR-10 full core first criticality analysis with MCNP. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2003, v. 222, pp. 263-270.
7. Stainsby R., Peers K., Mitchell C. Gas cooled fast reactor research in Europe. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2011, v. 241, no. 2, pp. 3481-3489.
8. Fu M., Liang T., Tang Y. Preparation of UO2 kernel for HTR-10 fuel element. Nuclear Science and Technology. 2004, v. 41, no. 9, pp. 943-948.
9. Lee W.J., Kim Y.W., Chang J. Perspectives of nuclear heat and hydrogen. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2009, v. 41, no. 4, pp. 412-426.
10. Shamanin I.V., Ukhov A.A., Rutten H. J., Haas K., Sherer W. The Use of (Th, U, Pu)O2 Fuel in a Water Water Energy Reactor (WWER-1000): Physics and Fuel Cycle Simulation by means of the V.S.O.P.(97) Computer Code. Forschungs zentrum Julich, FZJ-ISR-IB-1/99, 1999, 40 p.
11. Shamanin I.V. Sledstviya, vyzvannye otlichiyami struktur rezonansnoj oblasti pogloshheniya jader238U i 232Th [Consequences caused by the differences in the structures of the resonance region of absorbing 238U and 232Th]. Al’ternativnaya energetika i ekologiya. 2006, no. 11 (43), pp. 47-53.
12. Shamanin I., Bedenko S., Gubaydulin I .Advantages of Thorium Nuclear Fuel for Thermal-Neutron Reactors. Advanced Materials Research. 2015, v. 1084, pp. 275-279.
13. Allelein H.J., Kania M.J., Nabielek H., Verfondern K. Thorium fuel performance assessment in HTRs. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2014, v. 217, pp. 166-170.
14. Kania M.J., Nabielek H., Verfondern K. Testing of HTR UO2 TRISO fuels in AVR and in material test reactors. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2013, v. 441, no.1-3, pp. 545-562.
15. Nabielek H., Kьhnlein W., Schenk W. Development of advanced HTR fuel elements. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1990, v. 121, no. 2, pp. 199-210.
16. Proekt MCU. Modelirovanie processa perenosa chastic metodom Monte-Karlo [Project MCU. Modelling of process of transport of particles by the Monte Carlo method]. Available at: http://mcuproject.ru/rinfo.html (accessed 02.04.2014) (in Russian).
17. Garin V.P., Glushkov A.E., Glushkov E.S., Gomin E.A., Gurevich M.I., Zimin A.A., Kompaniec G.V., Kuharkin N.E., Lobyncev V.A., Nosov V.I., Poljakov D.N., Ponomarev-Stepnoj N.N., Smirnov O.N., Tel’kovskaja O.V., Chunjaev E.I. Ocenennye benchmark-eksperimenty na kriticheskih sborkah, modeliruyuschie osobennosti VTGR na stende ASTRA [Evaluated Benchmark Experiments in Critical Assemblies Modeling HTGR Peculiarities at the ASTRA Facility]. VANT. Fizika yadernyh reaktorov. 2009, v. 2, pp. 75-96 (in Russian).