+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:14:53+03:00"
issue="2016-02"
issue_name="2016 - #02"
number="13"
file="pdf/2016-02/2016-02-article-13.pdf"
udc="621.039.51.17"
title="Priorities in the development of nuclear constants support system for reactor and shielding calculations"
authors=["ManturovGN", "NikolaevMN"]
tags=["neutron data files", "ROSFOND", "multigroup nuclear constants", "BNAB", "calculations of fast reactors", "radiation shielding", "fuel cycle"]
rubric="physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name="Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"

+++

Equation transport of neutron and gamma radiation in the energy, essential in the calculations of fast reactors and radiation shielding, does not contain any significant approximations - the accuracy of its solution is determined almost entirely accurate knowledge of the characteristics of the interaction of radiation with matter and, only partially, of correctness of computational techniques. 
Providing computational codes with reliable data about the characteristics of the interaction is the responsibility of the sectoral metrological service. 
Bringing methods of using these characteristics in the calculation of radiation fields in accordance with the state of knowledge of these characteristics should be one of the most important tasks in developing a new generation of codes.

Hereafter the priorities in this direction are considered that must be addressed when developing a new generation of constants supplying software for fast reactor calculations as it is a unified system ABBN-2020 of multigroup neutron nuclear physics constants obtained on the basis of files ROSFOND national neutron data library. 
At the same time, along with the creation of a perfect system to ensure nuclear constants calculations, a considerable attention must be paid to the development and creation of methodology and computer code system for the evaluation and ranking of the estimated errors in the calculation of nuclear reactors in order to be concentrated on the most important issues.

Creating of a new generation unified nuclear constants support system ABBN-2020 and its implementation in the design codes will not only ensure uniformity neutron constants preparation procedures, which will increase the reliability of their verification, but also improve the accuracy and reliability of predictions of the most important characteristics of the designed reactors, providing their license purity, competitiveness and independence from foreign developments.

### References

1. Nikolaev M. N., Nuclear Data for Calculations of Fast Reactors.  Way to Recent State and Tasks for Future Development. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 5–16 (in Russian).
2. Nikolaev M.N., Ryazanov B.G., Savoskin M.M., Tsibulya A.M. Multigroup approach in the neutron transport theory. Мoscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1984 (in Russian).
3. Plompen A.J.M., Fukahori T., Ignatyuk A., Manturov G. The NEA High Priority Nuclear Data Request List for future needs. Proc. of Intern. Conf. on Nuclear Data for Science and Technology, ND–2007. Nice, France. 2007, pp. 765–768.
4. Blyskavka A.A., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Programming complex CONSYST/MMKK for the calculation of nuclear reactors by Monte Carlo method in multigroup approach and Pn$approximation. Preprint IPPE-2887. Obninsk, 2001 (in Russian).
5. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo Neutron$Particle Transport Code. Version 5. X-5 Monte Carlo Team, Los Alamos National Laboratory, April 2003.
6. MacFarlane R.E., NJOY97.0 Code System for Producing Pointwise and Multigroup Neutron and Photon Sections from ENDF/B Data. – RSIC Peripheral Shielding Routine Collection, PSR-368.
7. Andrianova O.N., Golovko Yu.E., Jerdev G.M., Zadornov D.B., Koscheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Peregudov A.A., Tsibulya A.M. Testing covariance matrices of ABBN constants system. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp.109-117 (in Russian).
8. Blyskavka A., Jerdev G., Manturov G., Raskach K., Tsiboulia A. Use of the SKALA Code Package for Computing Criticality and its Uncertainty. Proc. of the 8th Int. Conf. on Nuclear Criticality Safety (ICNC2007), St. Petersburg, Russia, May 28-June 1, 2007, v.1, pp. 373-376.
9. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Constant supplying program CONSYST. Application description: Preprint FEI-2828. Obninsk, 2000 (in Russian).
10. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsiboulia A.M. BNAB$93 Group Data Library. Part 1: Nuclear Data for Calculation of Neutron and Photon Radiation Fields. INDC (CCP)-409/L, IAEA, pp.65-110 (1997).
11. Nikolaev M.N., Savoskin M.M., Khokhlov V.F. Complex ARAMAKO programs for calculating group of macro$ and micro-cross blocked on the basis of 26-group constant system representation in a subgroup. Voprosy Atomnoj Nauki i Tehniki. Ser.Yadernye Konstanty. 1972, v. 8, iss. 3, pp. 3-15 (in Russian).
12. Grabezhnoy V., Koscheev V., Lomakov G., Manturov G. Verification of the ABBN-RF2010 constants in calculations of shielding benchmarks. Progress in Nuclear Science and Technology (PNST) of Atomic Energy Society of Japan. 2014, v. 4, pp. 587-590 (Proc. of Intern. Conf. on Radiation Shielding ’ICRS-12 & RPSD-2012‘, Nara, Japan, September 2-7, 2012).
13. Abagyan L.P., Bazazyants N.O., Bondarenko I.I., Nikolaev M.N. Group constants for nuclear reactor calculations. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1964 (in Russian).
14. Zabrodskaia S.V., Ignatiuk A.V., Koshcheev V.N., Manokhin V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Proniaev V.G. ROSFOND – The National Library of evaluated neutron data. Voprosy Atomnoj Nauki i Tehniki. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 2007, iss. 12, pp. 3-21 (in Russian).
15. ROSFOND. Available at: http://www.ippe.ru/podr/abbn/english/libr/rosfond.php
16. Koscheev V. N., Manturov G. N., Nikolaev M. N., Tsiboulia A. M. Verification of neutron data for main reactor materials from the ROSFOND neutron data library on integral experiments. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 1, pp. 204–214 (in Russian).
17. Golovko Yu., Koscheev V., Lomakov G., Manturov G., Rozhikhin Ye., Semenov M., Tsiboulya A., Yakunin A. Verification of current version of ABBN constants and CONSYST code in calculation of criticality benchmarks. Proc. of Intern. Conf. on Nuclear Data for Science and Technology ND2013, New-York, USA, March 4-8, 2013.
18. International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Nuclear Energy Agency, NEA/NSC/DOC(95)03 (September 2011 Edition).
19. International Handbook of Evaluated Reactor Physics Benchmark Experiments, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Nuclear Energy Agency, NEA/NSC/
DOC(2006)1 (March 2011 Edition).
20. Salvatores M., Palmiotti G., Aliberti G.,Archier P.,De Saint Jean C., Dupont E., Herman M., Ishikawa M., Ivanova T., Ivanov E., Kim S., Kodeli I., Manturov G., McKnight R., Pelloni S., Perfetti C., Plompen A.J.M., Rearden B.T., Rochman D., Sugino K., Trkov A., Wang W., Wu H., Yang W. Methods and issues for the combined use of integral experiments and covariance data: Results of a NEA International Collaborative Study. Nuclear Data Sheets, 2014, v. 118, iss. 1, pp. 38-71.
21. Peregudov A., Semenov M., Manturov G, Koscheev V., Tsibulya A. Application of the GRS method for estimation of uncertainties of LMFBR type reactor physics parameters with taking into account macroscopic experiments. Proc. of Intern. Conf. PHYSOR 2014 on the Role of
Reactor Physics Toward a Sustainable Future. The Westin Miyako, Kyoto, Japan, September 28 – October 3, 2014, on CD-ROM (2014).
22. Manturov G.N. Influence of Neutron Data Uncertainties on Accuracy of Prediction of Advanced Reactor Characteristics. Proc. of Intern. Conf. Nuclear Data for Science and Technology, May 9-13 1994, Gatlinburg, Tennessee. 1994, v. 2, pp. 993-999, ORNL, ANS.