+++

categories="article"
date="2018-11-15T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2018-04"
issue_name="2018 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/04/05.pdf"
first_page="53"
last_page="63"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental bench for gas¬dynamic investigations of the furnace channel for nuclear fuel pellets sintering"
original_title="Экспериментальный стенд для газодинамических исследований канала печи спекания таблеток ядерного топлива"
authors=["KuzminIV", "LeshchenkoAYu", "PavlovSV", "ShamsutdinovRN", "MochalovYS"]
tags=["gas-dynamic investigations", "sintering furnace", "furnace channel", "zone of furnace", "mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel", "modelling gas concentration distribution", "measuring gas concentration", "gas sampling", "barrier"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.4.05"

+++

The sintering of nuclear fuel pellets in high-temperature furnaces is strictly performed in the atmosphere with well-defined requirements on the gas composition in different temperature zones of the furnace. Implementation of the preset process regimes in the furnace for sintering mixed uranium-plutonium nitride (MUPN) fuel pellets is ensured by the selection of the layout of gas supply system, the design of barriers between different temperature zones, as well as by the design of gas supply and removal units. Computational CFD model in Ansys Fluent software was created and validated for verifying functionality of the technical solutions applied in the design of furnace channel for MUPN sintering. Mockup sintering furnace channel included in the structure of the experimental bench for gas dynamic studies was designed and fabricated for validating the CFD model.

Description of the design and technical features of the mockup bench for measuring gas concentrations in the mockup furnace channel for MUPN fuel sintering is presented in the paper. The results of the gas-dynamic studies obtained on the experimental facility were used for computational and experimental substantiation of the technical solutions applied in the design of the sintering furnace channel. Functionality of the barriers for segregating the furnace, gas supply and removal units was experimentally tested. The obtained experimental data on the distribution of technological gas concentrations allow validating computational thermal physics and gas dynamics CFD models of the furnace channel for MUPN fuel sintering.

### References

1. Bezzubcev V.S., Emel’janov V.S., Adamov E.O. Innovative Design of NPP with a BREST reactor and fuel cycle. Proc. II science conference Minatom of Russia «Nuclear Energy. Status and Prospects». Moscow, 2002, 85 p. (in Russian).
2. Eliseev V.A., Zabud’ko L.M., Malysheva I.V., Matveev V.I. Nitride fuel for future fast sodium reactor BN-1200. Atomnaya energiya, 2013, v. 114, iss. 5, pp. 266-271 (in Russian).
3. Adamov E.O., Zabud’ko L.M., Matveev V.I., Rachkov V.I., Trojanov V.M., Homjakov Ju.S., Leonov V.N. Comparative study of advantages and disadvantages of the use of metal and mixed nitride uranium-plutonium fuel in fast reactors. Izvestiya Rossijskoj akademii nauk. Energetika. 2015, no. 2, pp. 3-15 (in Russian).
4. Denisov A., Reynaud V., Smirnov V., Pavlov S., Renard F, Chamovskih Y., Sergeev N., Shkurin P., Davydov A., Glushenkov A. Key features of design, manufacturing and implementation of laboratory and industrial equipment for Mixed Uranium'Plutonium Oxide (MOX) and Nitride fuel pellets fabrication in Russia. International conference on fast reactors and related fuel cycles: next generation nuclear systems for sustainable development (FR17). Yekaterinburg, 2017. IAEA-CN245-563.
5. Bernard H., Bordello P., Warin D. Mixed nitride fuels fabrication in Convention oxide line. Proc. of a Technical Committee Meeting on Advanced Fuel for FBRs: Fabrication, Properties and their optimization, 1987 (IAEA, Vienna, 1988), pp. 43-51.
6. Silva G.R.C., Philips T., Dwyer J.J., Zurecki Z. Techniques and tips to optimize, control and stabilize the atmosphere inside a continuous sintering furnace. Mater. Sci. Forum, Florianopolis. 2012, v. 727-728, pp. 404-411.
7. Reshetnikov F. G., Bibilashvili Yu. K., Golovin I. S. Development, production, and operation of fuel elements of power reactors. Book 1. Moscow: Energoatomizdat Publ., 1995, pp. 104-107 (in Russian).
8. IAEA-TECDOC-1686 Experience and trends of manufacturing technology of advanced nuclear fuels. 2012, pp. 52-55.
9. Troyanov V.M., Grachev A.F., Zabudko L.M., Skupov M.V., Kireev G.A. Program and results of reactor tests of mixed nitride fuel for fast reactors. Atomnaya energiya. 2014, v. 117, no. 4, pp. 192-197 (in Russian).
10. Arai Y., Fukushima S., Shiozawa K., Handa M. Fabrication of (U, Pu)N fuel pellets. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1989, v. 168, no. 3, pp. 280-289.
11. Streit M., Ingold F. Nitrides as a nuclear fuel option. Journal of the European Ceramic Society. 2005, v. 25, pp. 2687-2692.
12. Ganguly C., Hegde P., Sengupta A. Preparation, characterization and out-of-pile property evaluation of (U,Pu)N fuel pellets. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1991, v. 178, no. 2-3, pp. 234-241.
13. Alekseev S.V., Zaytsev V.A. Nitride Fuel for Nuclear Power. Moscow. Technosfera Publ., 2013, pp. 130-134 (in Russian).
14. Feldbauer L. A review of the fundamentals of stainless steel brazing in a continuous style, controlled atmosphere brazing furnaces. Proceedings of the IIIrd International brazing and soldering conference, San Antonio TX, 2006, ASM International, pp. 334-337.
15. Ansys Inc. Ansys Fluent Theory Guide, Release 14.0. USA. Ansys, 2011, 826 p.
16. Leshchenko A.Y., Pavlov S.V., Shamsutdinov R.N. Modelling of gas distribution in the furnace for MUPN sintering. Proc. of the VI scientific seminar «Modelling of technologies of the nuclear fuel cycle». Snezhinsk. RFYaC-VNIITF Publ., 2017, p. 28 (in Russian).
17. Ying L., Fu-Yong S., Zhi W., Zhi L., Hai-Quan Y., Xiao-Hong F. CFD modeling of flow, temperature and concentration fields in a pilot-scale rotary hearth furnace. Metallurgical and Materials Transactions B. 2014, v. 45, no. 1, pp. 251-261.
18. Miaoren N., Zhuoyong Y., Qinghua G., Qinfeng L., Guangsuo Y., Fuchen W., Zunhong Y. Experimental measurement of gas concentration distribution in an impinging entrained-flow gasifier. Fuel Processing Technology. 2008, v. 89, no. 11, pp. 1060-1068.
19. Zavila O., Blejchai. T. Capacities and limitations of wind tunnel physical experiments on motion and dispersion of different density gas pollutants. Measurement Science Review. 2017, v. 17, no. 2, pp. 53-60.
20. Zavila O., Herecova L., Micek D., Hejzlar T. Numerical simulation of heavy and light pollutants motion as a tool of experimental data verification. Communications. 2011, v. 13, no. 2, pp. 37-43.