+++

categories="article"
date="2018-11-15T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2018-04"
issue_name="2018 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/04/08.pdf"
first_page="89"
last_page="101"
udc="621.039.003"
title="Comparative analysis of the investment attractiveness of nuclear power plant concepts based on small and medium sized reactor modules and a large nuclear reactor"
original_title="Сравнительный анализ инвестиционной привлекательности энергоблоков АЭС на базе реакторных модулей малой и средней мощности и реактора большой мощности"
authors=["AndrianovAA", "KuptsovIS", "OsipovaTA_mephi", "AndrianovaON"]
tags=["small and medium sized reactors", "modular NPP", "economic efficiency indicators", "economic risk"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.4.08"

+++

It seems to be of current interest to consider and analyze possible electrical and non-electrical applications of small and medium sized reactors for both the nearest and more distant future. The paper presents a comparative analysis of the investment attractiveness of a nuclear power plant design based on small and medium sized reactor modules and a large sized reactor. The authors identify conditions for increasing the investment attractiveness of a nuclear power plant based on small and medium sized reactor modules. The performed analysis showed that, in terms of the total discounted and levelized costs, the nuclear power plant modular design concept has no economic attractiveness at all. Taking into account the net present value, internal rate of return and payback period, it is possible to speak about the feasibility of the nuclear power plant modular design concept if only the predicted learning effect is observed when the modules are constructed and the scale factor is no less than 0.5. In this case, it will be economically feasible to construct a nuclear power plant based on a small number of medium sized modules. If the scale factor is not less than 0.6, then we can talk about the feasibility of nuclear power plant designs based on reactor modules of lower power. The authors also analyze the impact of various debt financing schemes to show that, in relative terms, changes in the economic performance indicators are comparable in the implementation of the nuclear power plant modular design and a large sized reactor.

### References

1. IAEA, Status of Innovative Small and Medium Sized Reactor Designs 2005: Reactors with Con-ventional Refuelling Schemes, IAEA-TECDOC-1485, Vienna, Austria, 2006. 703 p.
2. IAEA, Status of Small Reactor Designs without On-site Refuelling, IAEA-TECDOC-1536, Vienna, Austria, 2007. 859 p.
3. IAEA, Design Features to Achieve Defence in Depth in Small and Medium Sized Reactors; IAEA: Vienna, Austria, 2009. 264 p.
4. IAEA, Status of Small and Medium Sized Reactor Designs: A Supplement to the IAEA Advanced Reactors Information System (ARIS); IAEA: Vienna, Austria, 2011. 82 p.
5. Kessides I., Kuznetsov V. Small Modular Reactors for Enhancing Energy Security in Developing Countries. Sustainability. 2012, iss. 4, no. 8, pp. 1806-1832. Available at: http:// www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/4/8/1806 (accessed Jan 20, 2018 ).
6. NEA OECD, Current Status, Technical Feasibility and Economics of Small Nuclear Reactors, Nuclear Development, 2011. 175 p.
7. IAEA, Approaches for Assessing the Economic Competitiveness of Small and Medium Sized Reactors, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No. NP-T-3.7, Vienna (2013). 258 p.
8. IAEA, Financing of New Nuclear Power Plants, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No. NG-T-4.2, Vienna (2008). 21 p.
9. NEA OECD, The Financing of Nuclear Power Plants, 2009. 78 p.
10. IAEA, INPRO Methodology for Sustainability Assessment of Nuclear Energy Systems: Economics, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No. NG-T-4.4, Vienna (2014). 90 p.
11. Kuznetsov V., Barkatullah N. Approaches to Assess Competitiveness of Small and Medium Sized Reactors. Proceedings of the International Conference on Opportunities and Challenges for Water Cooled Reactors in the 21st Century, 27-30 October 2009, IAEA, Vienna, Austria, Paper 1501. 13 p.
12. Belli P., Anderson J., Barnum H., Dixon J., Tan J-P. Handbook on economic analysis of investment operations, Operational Core Services Network Learning and Leadership Center, World Bank (1998).
13. Requirements and criteria for nuclear technologies. E-Learning educational module. Available at: http://lannp.iate.obninsk.ru/course5 (accessed Jan 20, 2018 ).
14. Integrated Model for Competitiveness Analysis of Small and Medium Sized Reactors. Manual. Available at: http://www.iaea.org/NuclearPower/Downloads/SMR/docs/INCAS-Manual.pdf (accessed Jan 20, 2018 ).
15. Technical Reports Economic Evaluation of Bids for Nuclear Power Plants/ IAEA, Series No 396. – Vienna, 2000. 224 p.
16. Expansion Planning for Electrical Generating Systems: A Guidebook, Technical Reports Series No. 241, IAEA, Vienna (1984). 642 p.
17. Cost estimating guidelines for GENERATION IV nuclear energy systems. Generations IV International Forum. Revision 4.2, 2007. 181 p.
18. Andrianov A.A., Korovin Yu.A., Kuptsov I.S., Murogov V.M., Andrianova O.N. Comparative evaluation of nuclear reactor technologies of different maturity levels on economic risk measures. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 1, pp. 156-168 (in Russian).