+++

categories="article"
date="2018-11-15T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2018-04"
issue_name="2018 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/04/10.pdf"
first_page="115"
last_page="127"
udc="621.039.526"
title="BPSD code upgrade for solving the nuclear kinetics problem"
original_title="Модернизация программы расчета задачи нуклидной кинетики BPSD"
authors=["SeleznyovEF", "BelovAA", "BelousovVI", "ChernovaIS"]
tags=["BPSD", "nuclide kinetics problem", "nuclear transmutation chains", "nuclear neutron reactions", "radioactive decay", "nuclide", "fast neutron reactor", "calculation code"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.4.10"

+++

The paper describes an algorithm for solving the nuclide kinetics problem implemented in the BPSD program. The work of the program is based on the use of a full transition matrix, which removes restrictions on the number of transients and allows reverse transitions to be taken into account. As a result of its work, the program generates the nominal values of calculated nuclide concentrations and their errors estimated with allowance for the errors of the initial material composition, neutron flux density, decay constant, and nuclear neutron reaction microsections. The previous BPS/V1.0 code version was developed for fuel calculation. A description is given of the work carried out in 2017 to expand the scope of the program for various materials inherent to fast neutron reactors with a liquid-metal coolant. In particular, non-fuel materials were added, such as coolants, structural materials, and absorbers. The article provides basic information about the considered channels of nuclear transmutations for materials under the neutron flux influence and thereafter. The choice of added materials is focused primarily on the projects of fast neutron reactors such as BN-1200 and BREST-OD-300. The improved program version makes it possible to take into account factory impurities that are present in pure materials. Despite the small amount of impurity nuclides, they can affect the radiative properties of the material. The importance of taking into account impurities is exemplified by the accumulation of polonium-210 from the process-related bismuth impurity in the sodium coolant. The developed program can be used for research works, design and safety justification of nuclear power plants with fast neutron reactors with a liquid-metal coolant, as well as for training future specialists at universities.

### References

1. Seleznev E.F., Belov A.A. Solution of nuclide kinetics problem with full matrix of nuclides. Izvestiya Rossijskoy Akademii Nauk. Energetika. 2013, iss. 3, pp. 27-40 (in Russian).
2. Seleznev E.F. Fast Breeder Reactor Kinecics. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2013, pp. 178-198 (in Russian).
3. Seleznev Е.F., Belov А.А., Manturov G.N., Tsybulya А.М. Uncertainty Analysis for Fuel Flux Cal-culations of Fast Reactors with External Fuel Cycle. Proceedings of the International Conference on Physics of Reactors (PHYSOR 2014). Available at JAEA website dx.doi.org/10.11484/jaea-conf-2014-003 and from CD-ROM Data, Paper ID: a111101727.pdf.
4. Seleznev E.F., Asatrjan D.S., Belov A.A., Belousov V.I., Bereznev V.P., Vasekin V.N., Nuzhnyj A.S., Panova I.S. Neutronics codes. Proceedings of the International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power Industry» MNTK-2012. Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2012, pp. 396-407 (in Russian).
5. Korn G.A., Korn T.M. Mathematical Handbook. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1977, 832 p. (in Russian).
6. Zabrodskaja S.V., Ignatjuk A.V., Koshheev V.N., Manohin V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Pronjaev V.G. ROSFOND – Russian National Library Of Evaluated Neutron Data. VANT. Ser.: Yadernye Konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2, pp. 3-21 (in Russian).
7. Dub A.V., Lebedev A.G., Balikoev A.G., Korneev A.E., Morozova T.V. High entropy alloys0 promising materials for nuclear power. Proceedings of the International Scientific and Technical Confer-ence «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power Industry» MNTK-2012. Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2012, pp. 198-210 (in Russian).
8. GOST 5632-2014. Alloys of stainless steels and corrosion resistant, heat resistant and heat resistant alloys. Grades. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2015. 49 p. (in Russian).
9. Risovanyj V.D., Zaharov A.V., Klochkov E.P., Guseva T.M. Boron in nuclear engineering. Dimitrov-grad. SSC RIAR Publ., 2011. 223 p. (in Russian).
10. Risovanyj V.D., Klochkov E.P., Ponomarenko V.B. Hafnium in nuclear engineering. Dimitrovgrad. SSC RIAR Publ., 1993 (in Russian).
11. Risovanyj V.D., Zaharov A.V., Ponomarenko V.B., Klochkov E.P., Muraleva E.M. Disprosium in nuclear engineering. Ulyanovsk. UlGU Publ., 2013. 436 p. ISBN 978-5-88866-470-4 (in Russian).
12. Lemehov V.V. Smirnov V.S., Umanskij A.A. Core of reactor BREST: current status and prospects. Proceedings of the International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power Industry» MNTK-2012. Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2012. pp. 35-41 (in Russian).
13. Official website of National High Technology Centre Of Georgia. Available at: www.geoisotopes.com/en (accessed Apr 04, 2018).
14. Arhipov V.M. Sodium technologies at nuclear power plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986. 136 p. (in Russian).
15. Nonferrous metal. Tin. Lead. Technical conditions. Moscow. IPK Publishing House of Standards, 2000, pp. 24-26 (in Russian).