+++

categories="article"
date="2018-11-15T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2018-04"
issue_name="2018 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/04/12.pdf"
first_page="138"
last_page="151"
udc="614.876; 539.1.037; 519.245"
title="Numerical simulation in dosimetry problems of nuclear medicine and radiobiology"
original_title="Численное моделирование в дозиметрических задачах ядерной медицины и радиобиологии"
authors=["DenisovaEN", "SnegirevAS", "KurachenkoYA", "KozminGV", "BudarkovBA", "SanzharovaNI", "MatusevichES"]
tags=["domain modeling", "radiation transport modeling", "domain voxelization", "databases", "on-line calculations", "radiation accident", "farm animals", "radioactive iodine", "thyroid gland", "compartmental model", "absorbed dose"]
rubric = "medicine"
rubric_name = "nuclear medicine and biology"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.4.12"

+++

Currently available computational capabilities (multi-core PCs, supercomputers, radiation transport codes) allowing solving radiation transport problems typically offer the possibility to preset periodical structures, for instance, nuclear reactor core cells. This possibility opens the way to the precision (voxel) domain modeling in the problems of nuclear medicine and radiobiology. The problem of absorbed dose calculation in the thyroid gland of cattle caused by radiation accidents was examined. The purpose of the study is the determination of coordinated values of critical dose of 131I in thyroid glands of animals resulting in serious dysfunction of the gland with its subsequent destruction. Complex studies were performed for this purpose further specifying parameters of the compartmental model based on the reliable experimental and theoretical data. Modern technologies were applied in the modeling of thyroid gland and surrounding tissues. Monte-Carlo code taking into account contributions of both γ- and β-radiation emitted from the source, as well as of secondary radiation along the whole chains until the complete dissipation of energy was used in the solution of 131I radiation transport equation. The main theoretical result of the study is the obtained conversion factor of 131I activity uniformly distributed over the volume of the thyroid gland to the average dose rate in the gland (Bq → Gy/s). The factor was calculated for animals for the chosen configuration of the subject area and the thyroid gland morphology. The main practical result is the reliable estimation of the lower limit of the absorbed dose of internal 131I radiation in the thyroid gland equal to ~ 300 Gy destructing it within short time.

### References

1. Authors: X-5 Monte Carlo Team. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo NParticle Transport Code, Version 5. Volume I: Overview and Theory. LA-UR-03-1987, 2003, 484 p.
2. Kurachenko Yu.A., Moiseenko D.N. Voxel phantoms in problems of medical physics. Medicinskaya fizika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 27-34 (in Russian).
3. Voznesensky N.K., Mardynsky Yu.S., Kurachenko Yu.A., Matusevich Eu.S., Voznesenskaya N.N. Radionuclide vertebroplasty at spinal metastases. Medicinskaya radiologiya i radiatsionnaya bezopasnost. 2012, v. 57, no. 3, pp. 39-43 (in Russian).
4. Levchenko A.V., Zabaryansky Yu.G., Golovin A.A., Voznesensky N.K., Kurachenko Yu.A. Software for radionuclide vertebroplasty. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 52-61 (in Russian).
5. Germogenova T.A. Numerical methods for solving the kinetic equation in the problems of shielding physics against radiation of the reactor. Atomnaya energiya. 1975, v. 3, iss. 6, pp. 401-405 (in Russian).
6. Kurachenko Yu.A. Reactor beams for radiation therapy. Calculation models and computation technologies. Palmarium Academic Publishing, OmniScriptum GmbH&Co. RG, Saarbrьcken, Deutschland. (ISBN: 978-3-8473-9842-4) 2013. 372 p. (in Russian).
7. ICRP Publication 103. The 2007 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection Ann. ICRP 37. 332 p.
8. Budarkov V.A. Justification of cattle selection as one of the reference organisms in the system of environmental protection from radiation. Radiatsionnaya biologiya. Radioekologiya. 2009, v. 49, no. 2, pp. 179-185 (in Russian).
9. France J., Kebreab E. Mathematical Modelling in Animal Nutrition. Centre for Nutrition Modelling University of Guelph. Wallingford: Biddles Ltd, King’s Lynn, 2008, 588 p.
10. Sirotkin A.N., Panchenko I.Ya., Tyumenev L.N., Panteleev L.I., Nikolayeva E.M., Grishin A.I., Korneev N.A. Comparative behavior of 131I in cows at different sources of its intake. In Collection «Biological effect of external and internal sources of radiation». Moscow. Medicina Publ., 1972, pp. 72-77 (in Russian).
11. Odejchuk A.N. A generalized criterion for the effectiveness of forecasting models for time series in information systems. Bionika intellektu. 2009, no. 1(70), pp. 113-119. Available at: http://irbis-nbuv.gov.ua (accessed Aug 01, 2018) (in Russian).
12. Spirin Eu.V., Lazarev N.M., Sarapul’tsev I.A. Formation of a dose of calves thyroid irradiation at 131I receipt with a forage. Doklady Rossijskoj Akademii Sel’skokhozyajstvennykh Nauk. 2004, no. 4, pp. 54-55 (in Russian).
13. Peksa Z., Travnichek J., Dushova H., Konechy R., Hason’ova L. Morphological and histometric parameters of the thyroid gland in slaughter cattle. J Agrobiology. 2011, v. 28(1), pp. 79-84.
14. Suuroja T., Jyarveots T., Lepp E. Age-related morphological changes of thyroid gland in calves. Veterinarija ir zootechnika. 2003, v. 23(45), pp. 55-59.
15. ICRP Publication 89. 2002 Basic anatomical and physiological data for use in radiological protection: reference values. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. Ann. ICRP 32. 2003. 277 p.
16. Klyopov A.N., Kurachenko Yu.A., Levchenko V.A., Matusevich Eu.S. Application of mathematical modeling techniques in nuclear medicine. Obninsk: OGTUAE, OOO ENIMTs «Simulation systems» Publ., 2006, 206 p. (in Russian).
17. Budarkov V.A., Zenkin A.S., Arkhipov N.I., Yunusova R.M., Mayakov E.A., Amirkhanyan A.R., Prilepskaya E.P., Surgucheva L.M. The influence of iodine-131 on cheep depending on the content of stable iodine in a diet. Radiobiologiya. 1992, v. 32(3), no. 3, pp. 451-458 (in Russian).
18. Budarkov V.A., Arkhipov N.I., Zenkin A.S., Yunusova R.M., Yastrebkov Yu. A. Accidental release products’ effect of Chernobyl NPP on the thyroid gland of animals. Veterinariya. 1990, no. 7, pp. 60-63 (in Russian).
19. A Toxicological Profile for Iodine. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Division of Toxicology. USA. Atlanta, Georgia. 2004, 517 pp.