+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="01"
file="pdf/2016/03/2016-03-article-01.pdf"
udc="621.039:62-622"
title="Multifunctional backup electricity supply for NPP auxiliary needs based on combined cycle power plant with hydrogen overheating"
authors=["YurinVE"]
tags=["emergency electricity supply", "hydrogen cycle", "combustion chamber", "nuclear power plant", "combined cycle gas turbine unit", "maneuverability", "safety", "backup electricity supply for covering auxiliary needs of the NPP", "nuclear emergency with complete loss of electric power supply"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"

+++

Approach is suggested of combining nuclear power plant with combined cycle gas turbine
unit and hydrogen producing complex which, while operated in normal conditions, give the
possibility to increase plant capacity and, in case of complete blackout, to ensure supply of
electricity for covering auxiliary needs of the NPP. It is suggested to use hydrogen for
overheating generated steam by exhaust gases of the gas turbine plant included in the
composition of the combined cycle gas turbine unit. Combined cycle gas turbine unit must
be installed beyond the NPP site. Hydrogen is to be generated by electrolysis of water using
cheap offpeak energy produced by the NPP during nighttime, following which hydrogen
will be efficiently used during the day for enhancing parameters of steam before the gas
turbine included in the composition of the combined cycle gas turbine unit.

Probabilistic assessment was performed of reliability of the proposed system in the
conditions of loss of power supply for the case of joint use of the combined cycle gas turbine
unit and emergency electric power supply channels equipped with diesel generators.

The proposed system allows ensuring supply of electricity for covering auxiliary needs
of the NPP during more than 72 hours. Use of the steam turbine plant included in the
composition of the combined cycle gas turbine unit is possible for covering auxiliary needs
of the NPP in case of failure of gas turbine plants. Steam turbine can be operated due to
the generation of additional steam during incineration of hydrogen in oxygen. With
appropriate modernization the system allows using decay heat released in the nuclear reactor
core. It was established that the proposed option of combining NPP with combined cycle
gas turbine unit in combination with hydrogen generating complex allows enhancing
reliability of supply of electricity for covering auxiliary needs of the NPP in emergency
conditions accompanied with loss of electric power supply.

### References

1. Aminov R.Z., Egorov A.N., Yurin V.E. A method of cooling down water!cooled reactor of NPP with full blackout, Patent RF №2499307, 2013 (in Russian).
2. Aminov R.Z., Egorov A.N., Yurin V.E. Hydrogen Cycle Based Backup for NPP Internal Needs During a Blackout. Atomic Energy. 2013, v. 114, no. 4, pp. 289-292. DOI: 10.1007/s10512-013-9712-0 (in Russian).
3. Aminov R.Z., Yurin V.E. Nuclear power plant safety improvement based on hydrogen technologies, Nuclear Energy and Technology (2016). Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.nucet.2015.11.016.
4. Aminov R.Z., Egorov A.N., Yurin V.E. Multifunctional redundancy own needs in nuclear power plants. / Proceedings of the IXth International Conference «Science, Technology and Higher Education». December 23–24, 2015. Westwood, Canada.
5. Malyshenko S.P. JIHT RAS Research and Development in the Field of Hydrogen Energy Technologies. International Scientific Journal for Alternative Energy and Ecology, 2011, v. 95, no. 3, pp. 10-34.
6. Yurin V.E. Approach to improving maneuverability of NPP. Patent RF №2529508, 2014 (in Russian).
7. Aminov R.Z., Bayramov A.N., Yurin V.E. The system of hydrogen combustion in the cycle of NPP with controlled temperature of hydrogen!oxygen steam. Patent RF №2488903, 2013 (in Russian).
8. Bayramov A.N. Efficiency of integration of NPP with hydrogen energy complex. Diss. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) 05.14.01: 20.04.10 defended: approved. 17.09.10. Moscow, 2010, 142 p. (in Russian).
9. Aminov R.Z., Markelov D. A., Yurin V.E. System for Active Removal of the Decay heat Released in VVER-1000. Atomic Energy, 2015, v. 118, no. 5, pp. 324-330. DOI 10.1007/ s10512-015-0001-y (in Russian).
10. Shvyryaev Y.V., Morozov V.B. Rezultaty otkorrektirovannogo The results of corrected PSA for NPPs with enhanced safety equipped with VVER!1000 reactors. In Proc. of the VIIth International forum for the exchange of information «NPP Safety Analysis with the Reactor of the Type VVER and RBMK». Slovakia, 2003.
11. International Atomic Energy Agency. The Safety of Nuclear Power: Strategy for the Future. Proc. of the Conf., IAEA, Vienna, 1991.
12. Gauntt R., Kalinich D., Cardoni J. Fukushima Daiichi Accident Study Report. Sandia National Laboratories. 2012. 298p.
13. Tanaka T. Examination of Natural Circulation and Heat Removal by Steam Generator, Proc. of the VIth International Conference on Nuclear Thermal Hydraulics, Operation and Safety (NUTHOS-6), №N6P054, Nara, Japan, 2004.
14. Oikawa H. Safety System Improvement for the Next Generation BWR. Proc. Vth Internal Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE-5), No-2538. Nice, France, 1997.
15. Vijayan P., Safety features in nuclear power plants to eliminate the need of emergency planning in public domain. Academy Proceedings in Engineering Sciences, v. 38, iss. 5, pp. 925-943.
16. Aminov R.Z., Yurin V.E. Evaluating the effectiveness of the active decay heat removal system during blackout using the example of the VVER-1000 reactor. Izvestiya RAN. Energetics, 2014, no. 6, pp. 61-72 (in Russian).
17. Aminov R.Z., Garievsky M.V., Bayramov A.N., Yurin V.E. Probabilistic safety assessment of NPP under the conditions of blackout under backing up the total station auxiliary needs on the basis of continuously operated turbines. Certificate of Computer program state registration № 2013660800, 2013 (in Russian).
18. Popyrin L.S., Stromberg Y.Y., Dilman M.D. Reliability of combined-cycle plants. Teploenergetika, 1999, no. 7, pp.50-53 (in Russian).
19. Tokmachev G.V. Approach to the use of probabilistic safety analysis in the design of new generation of WWER reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2007, no. 4, pp. 44-53
(in Russian).
20. Aminov R.Z., Batenin V.M., Ipatov P.L. Application of combined cycle gas turbine plants for backing up NPP auxiliary needs. Teploenergetika, 2006, no. 12, pp. 25-28 (in Russian).
21. Yurin V.E. Investigation of systems of active removal of reactor decay heat of on the basis of nuclear power plants combined with multifunction plants. Diss. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) 05.14.01: 29.09.15, approved 30.12.15. Moscow, 2015, 115 p. (in Russian).