+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:18:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="04"
file="/pdf/2016/03/2016-03-article-04.pdf"
udc="620.039.516.2:620.039.515"
title="Dispersion equation for the reactivity meter"
authors=["YuferovAG"]
tags=["reactivity meter", "metrology", "dispersion equation", "control and management of nuclear facilities"]
rubric="safety"
rubric_name="Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"

+++

The aim of this work is the output and analysis of the metrological model of the reactivity meter in the form of the dispersion equation, connecting the dispersion of input and output signals of the reactivity meter with imposing random noise on the input.
Hardwaresoftware implementation of the dispersion equation in the composition of the reactivity meter gives the opportunity to display the uncertainty evaluation of reactivity in real time. 
It is proposed to standardize the form of the equation for the reactivity meter, presenting the main computing unit of the reactivity meter as equation convolution. 
Thus metrological characteristics of the reactivity meter is completely determined by the hardware function of this unit. 
The hardware function is the transitive characteristic that describe the processes on delayed neutrons after the jump in power.
It is shown that the frequency response of the linear unit of the reactivity meter allows us to consider additive input noise as white. 
Is established the practical coincidence of frequency characteristics corresponding to the fission by the thermal and fast neutrons. 
For the case of white noise at the input was obtained the expressions of the variance of reactivity with exponential and discrete representation of the transient response of delayed neutrons. 
Was calculated coefficients of the dispersion strengthening for a number of known systems of the constants of delayed neutrons when the input signal is either a power or speed. 
It is found that the dispersion strengthening is minimized by using the power as the input. 
Is specified the problems and directions for further research and development, concerning, in particular, the analysis of the reactivity of error estimates for the various circuit design of the reactimeter taking into account the range of applied electronic components.

### References

1. GOST R 8.5652014. GSI. Metrologicheskoe obespechenie ekspluatacii atomnykh stanciy. Osnovnye polozheniya [Metrological maintenance of operating nuclear power plants. The main provisions]. Moscow, Standartinform Publ., 2015. 19 p. (in Russian).
2. GOST R MEK 62385. Atomnye stancii – sictemy kontrolya i upravleniya, vazhnye dlya bezopasnosti  metody ocenki rabochikh kharakteristik izmeritelnykh kanalov sistem bezopasnosti [Nuclear power plants  Instrumentation and control important to safety Methods for assessing the performance of safety system instrument channels]. Moscow, Standartinform Publ., 2011. 63 p. (in Russian).
3. GOST 2744587. Sistemy kontrolya neytronnogo potoka dlya upravleniya i zashchity yadernykh reaktorov. Obshchie tekhnicheskie trebovaniya [Neutron flux monitoring systems for control and protection of nuclear reactors. General specifications]. Moscow, Standartinform Publ., 2011. 18 p. (in Russian).
4. IEC 60231. General principles of nuclear reactor instrumentation.
5. IEC 60568. Nuclear power plants – Instrumentation important to safety – Incore instrumentation for neutron fluence rate (flux) measurements in power reactors.
6. MI 22280. Metodika rascheta metrologicheskikh kharakteristik izmeritelnykh kanalov informacionnoizmeritelnykh sistem po metrologicheskim kharakteristikam komponentov [Method of calculation of metrological characteristics of measuring channels of information measuring systems metrological characteristics of components]. Moscow, Izdatelstvo standartov Publ., 1981. 24 p. (in Russian).
7. MI 244097. GSI. Metody eksperimentalnogo opredeleniya i kontrolya kharakteristik pogreshnosti izmeritelnykh kanalov, izmeritelnykh sistem i izmeritelnykh kompleksov [Methods of experimental determination and control characteristics of the error of measurement channels, measuring systems and measuring systems]. Moscow. VNIIMS Publ., 1999. 13 p. (in Russian).
8. MI 22322000. GSI. Obespechenie effektivnosti izmereniy pri upravlenii tekhnologicheskimi processami. Ocenivanie pogreshnosti izmereniy pri ogranichennoy iskhodnoy informacii [Providing measurement of efficiency in the management of technologycal processes. Evaluation of measurement uncertainty with limited initial information]. Moscow. VNIIMS Publ., 2000. 10 p. (in Russian).
9. RD EO 01502004.Tipovye programmy i metodiki provedeniya fizicheskikh
eksperimentov na energoblokakh atomnykh elektrostanciy s reaktorami VVER1000 [Programs and methods of physical experiments on nuclear power units with VVER1000 reactors]. Moscow. Rosenergoatom Publ., 2005 (in Russian).
10. RD EO 01512004. Metodiki rascheta neytronnofizicheskikh kharakteristik po dannym fizicheskikh eksperimentov na energoblokakh AES s reaktorami VVER1000 [Method of calculation of neutronphysical characteristics according to physical experiments on nuclear power units with VVER1000 reactors]. Moscow. Rosenergoatom Publ., 2005 (in Russian).
11. Rekomendacii po sopostavleniyu rasschitannoy i izmerennoy reaktivnosti pri obosnovanii yadernoy bezopasnosti reaktornykh ustanovok tipa VVER [Recommendations for comparing the calculated and measured reactivity on basing nuclear safety of reactor VVER type plants]. Moscow. NTC YaRB Publ., 2010. 21 p. (in Russian).
12. Yuferov A.G. Bibliografiya po razrabotkam reaktimetrov i metodam izmereniya reaktivnosti v FEI [Bibliography on development of the reactivity meters and methods of the reactivity measurements in IPPE]. Obzor FEI295. Moscow. CNIIAtominform Publ., 2003. 39 p. (in Russian).
13. Zemelman M.A., Tronova I.M. Metodicheskij material po primeneniyu GOST 8.00984 «GSI. Normiruemye metrologicheskie kharakteristiki sredstv izmerenij». Normirovanie i ispol’zovanie metrologicheskikh harakteristik sredstv izmereniy [Methodological material for use GOST 8.00984 «GSI. Standardized metrological characteristics of measuring instruments». Standardization and use of metrological characteristics of measuring instruments]. Moscow. Izdatel’stvo standartov Publ., 1985, pp. 43-132 (in Russian).
14. Vashny E. Dinamika izmeritelnykh cepej [Dynamics of measuring circuits]. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1969. 288 p. (in Russian).
15. Granovskiy V.A. Dinamicheskie izmereniya. Osnovy metrologicheskogo obespecheniya [Dynamic measurements. Fundamentals of metrology software]. Leningrad. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984. 224 p. (in Russian).
16. Yuferov A.G., Ibragimov R.L. Reaktimetr kak adaptivnyy cifrovoy filtr [Reactimeter as an adaptive digital filter]. Atomnaya energiya, 2005, v. 98, iss. 4, pp. 253260 (in Russian).
17. Borisov V.F., Komshilov O.A. Analiz pogreshnostey izmeritelya reaktivnosti [Analysis of reactivity meter errors]. Izmeritelnaya tekhnika, 2002, no. 10, pp. 4952 (in Russian).
18. Yuferov A.G. K zadache identifikacii integralnykh uravneniy kinetiki [On the problem of identification of integral equations of the kinetics]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2005, no. 4, pp. 2534 (in Russian).
19. Uhrig R.E. Random Noise Techniques in Nuclear Reactor Systems. Ronald Press, N.Y., 1970. 490 p. 20. Cooper G.R., McGillem C. D. Probabilistic Methods of Signal and System Analysis. Oxford University Press, 1998. 491 p.
21. Goryainov V.T., Zhuravlev A.G., Tikhonov V.I. Primery i zadachi po statisticheskoy radio tekhnike [Examples and problems in statistical radio engineering]. Moscow. Sovetskoe radio Publ., 1970. 600 p. (in Russian).
22. Astapov Yu.M., Medvedev V.S. Statisticheskaya teoriya sistem avtomaticheskogo regulirovaniya i upravleniya [Statistical theory of automatic regulationtion and control systems]. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1982. 304 p. (in Russian).
23. Boev I.A., Kolotushkin D.S. Razvitie metodik izmereniya reaktivnosti i neytronno fizicheskih harakteristik reaktorov VVER na Novovoronezhskoj AES [The development of methods of measurement of reactivity and neutronphysical characteristics of VVER Novovoronezh nuclear power plant]. Sbornik trudov MNTK99 «Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES s VVER». OKB «GIDROPRESS», Podol’sk, 2015. Available at http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/mntk2015/autorun/indexru.htm (in Russian).
24. Otnes R.K., Enochson L. Applied Time Series Analysis. Basic Techniques. Wiley, 1978. 449 p.
25. ISO/IEC Guide 98:1995. Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement. 105 p.
26. Guide to the Expression of Uncertainties for the Evaluation of Critical Experiments. Idaho National Laboratory, 2007. 94 p.