+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:17:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="05"
file="pdf/2016/03/2016-03-article-05.pdf"
udc="621.039.548"
title="In	service change in the flexural rigidity of the VVER	1000 fuel assemblies"
authors=["PavlovSV"]
tags=["fuel assembly", "fuel rod", "VVER", "flexural rigidity", "fuel burnup", "spacer grid", "FA skeleton", "FA bowing"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"

+++

Inservice dimensional stability of the VVER-1000 reactor fuel assemblies (FA) depends to a great extent on their flexural rigidity. 
A decrease in the flexural rigidity in the process of the FA operation in the reactor may lead to such FA bowing as will make it difficult for the absorber rods of the reactor control and protection system to move in the FA guide channels. 
This is not admissible from the point of view of the reactor operation safety.

This paper describes a method and a facility for the hot cell testing of the
irradiated VVER-1000 FA flexural rigidity. 
The method is based on measurements of the FA bowing induced by crosssectional loading. 
The load applied to the spacer grids is perpendicular to the grid ribs, and the FA bowing is measured optically using a TV camera. 
The facility can also be used to test the flexural rigidity of the FA skeleton after all of the fuel rods are removed. 
Several tens of VVER-1000 FAs with a burnup of ~ 4 to ~ 65 МW⋅day/kgU were tested by Dimitrovgrad Research Institute of Atomic Reactors. 
The generalization and an analysis of the test results have made it possible to identify the major factors that contribute to the inservice change in the flexural rigidity of the VVER-1000 FAs and to determine the experimental dependence of its change on burnup.

It has been shown that an increase in the burnup causes the flexural rigidity of TVSA and TVS2 FAs with a rigid skeleton to decrease to the minimum value of 5 kgf/mm, the burnup being 45 to 50 МW⋅day/kgU, and then to start growing again.
It has been found out that it is the fuel bundle, specifically the change in the force of the fuel rod compression in the spacer grid, that is responsible for the change in the FA flexural rigidity. The maximum TVSA and TVS2 FA bowing is in the range of 8 to 11 mm while the burnup is 48 to 63 МW⋅day/kgU. 
The newly adopted TVSA and TVS2 FA designs have contributed to the safe operation of the VVER-1000
control and protection system’s absorber rods.

### References

1. Enin A., Bezborodov Y., Pluzhnikov D. Improvement of VVER-1000 FA Design and Manufacturing Techniques: The Basic Results of Operation of VVER-1000 FA Made by JSC NCCP. – Proceedings of the VIIIth International Conference on VVER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support, 26 September – 4 October 2009, Helena Resort, Bulgaria, pр. 201-209.
2. Shmelev V. VVER Cores for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. IKTs Akademkniga Publ., 2004 (in Russian).
3. Troyanov V., Lykhachev Yu., Folomeev V. Method for Calculating the Longitudinal and Transverse Bowing of VVER-1000 FAs Induced by Operational Loads. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2002, no. pp. 44-54 (in Russian).
4. Troyanov V., Lykhachev Yu., Folomeev V. Modeling of the Thermal and Mechanical Behavior of FAs as Part of the VVER-1000 Reactor Core. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2002, no.3, pp. 14-19 (in Russian).
5. Proceedings of the Interdepartmental Committee for Identification of Causes for the Control Rod Sticking at VVER-1000 Units. V. 18. Moscow. Rosenergoatom Concern Publ., 1996 (in Russian).
6. Polenok V., Pavlov S., Smirnov V., Smirnov A., Markov D. Studies on the Problem Concerned
with the VVER-1000 Fuel Assembly Bending During Operation. Proc. of the Vt1h Interindustry Conference on Reactor Material Science. Dimitrovgrad, 812 September 1997. Dimitrovgrad. JSC SSC RIAR Publ., 1998, v. 1, part 1, pp. 47-58 (in Russian).
7. Pavlov S., Polenok V., Smirnov V. Procedures to Measure the VVER-1000 Fuel Assembly Bending Caused by Transverse Loads. Collection of JSC SSC RIAR papers, 1998, v. 3, pp. 85-93 (in Russian).
8. Pavlov S., Sukhikh А., Sagalov S. Nondestructive Examination of Nuclear Reactor Internals. Dimitrovgtrad. DITI MEPHI Publ., 2015, 320 p. (in Russian).
9. Markov D., Pavlov S., Novosyolov A. New Generation VVER and RBMK Fuel: Results of Post Irradiation Examination, Justification of Reliability and Operability. Proc. of the IXth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science. Dimitrovgrad, 1418 September 2009. Dimitrovgrad. JSC SSC RIAR Publ., 2009, pp. 24-46 (in Russian).
10. Pavlov S. Key Results of WWER-1000 Fuel Assemblies PostIrradiation Examinations. Proc. of the Xth International Conference on WWER Fuel Performance, Modeling and Experimental Support. 714 September 2013, Sandanski, Bulgaria, pp. 213-227.
11. Samoylov О., Kaydalov V., Romanov А., Falkov А., Shishkin А. Technical Specifications of the VVER-1000 TSVA Fuel Assembly. Proc. of the VIIIth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science]. Dimitrovgrad. JSC SSC RIAR Publ., 2008, pp. 412 (in Russian).
12. Molchanov V., Starikov A., Samoilov O., Kaidalov V., Falkov A., Romanov A., Shishkin A. Results of TVSA Fuel Assembly Development and 10Year Operation in VVER-1000 Reactor Cores: Development Trends. Proceedings of the VIIIth International Conference on VVER Fuel Performance, Modeling and Experimental Support. 26 September – 4 October 2009, Helena Resort, Bulgaria, pp. 191-200.
13. Ryzhov S., Mokhov V., Vasilchenko I., Kobelev S., Vjalitsyn V., Kushmanov S., Semiglazov S., Turkin A., Makhin V. Development Experience and Operation Results of TVS2 and TVS2M. Proc. of the IXth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science. Dimitrovgrad, 1418 September 2009. Dimitrovgrad. JSC SSC RIAR Publ., 2009, pp. 46-52 (in Russian).
14. Novosyolov A., Pavlov S., Polenok V., Markov D., Zhitelev V., Kobylyanskij G., Kostyuchenko A., Volkova I. State of the VVER Fuel Assembly Claddings after Six Years of Operation. Fizika i himiya obrabotki materialov. 2009, no. 2, pp. 24–32 (in Russian).
15. Polenok V., Markov D., Zhitelev V., Perepelkin S., Kobylyanskij G. Volkova I. State and parameters of VVER fuel rods with a burnup of up to 75 MW⋅day/kgU. Proc. of the VIIIth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science. Dimitrovgrad. JSC SSC RIAR Publ., 2008, pp. 138-147 (in Russian).
16. Zhytelev V., Markov D., Zvir Е., Polenok V., Shevlyakov G. Inservice change in the geometry of VVER-1000 fuel assembly with a rigid skeleton. Proc. of the IXth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science. Dimitrovgrad, 1418 September 2009. Dimitrovgrad. JSC SSC RIAR Publ., 2009, pp. 121-129 (in Russian).
17. Markov D.V., Pavlov S.V., Novoselov A. Ye., Polenok V.S., Zhitelev A.V., Zvir Ye.A., Chesanov V.V., Kobylyansky G.P. New Generation VVER and RBMK Fuel: Results of Post irradiation Examinations, Justification of Operational Reliability. Proceedings of 2010 LWR Fuel Performance / TopFuel / WRFPM. Orlando, Florida, USA, September 26–29, 2010. Paper 006, pp. 504-512.
18. Molchanov V., Panyushkin А., Zheleznyak V., Samoylov О., Kuul V., Kurylev V. Creation of Alternative Fuel Assemblies for the VVER-1000 Reactor. Results and Further Tasks Related to the FA Improvement. Proc. of the VIth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science. Dimitrovgrad, 11-15 September 2000. In 3 volumes. V. 2. Part 1. Dimitrovgrad, 2001, pp. 53-66 (in Russian).
19. Tyukin V. Operational Experience of Fuel Assembly TVS2 at Balakovo NPP. Proceedings of the VIIth International Conference on WWER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support, 17-21 September 2007. Albena Congress Center, Bulgaria, pp. 139-145.
20. Molchanov V., Starikov A., Samoilov O., Kaidalov V., Shishkin A., Falkov A. Results of WWER-1000 TVSA operation and tendencies for design development. Proc. of the VIIth International Conference on WWER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support, 1721 September 2007. Albena Congress Center, Bulgaria, pp. 218-222.