+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="06"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/03/06.pdf"
udc="621.039.586"
title="Study of regimes with disturbance of the conditions of cooling the reactor plant from the side of the secondary circuit of reactor VVER"
authors=["BelozerovVI", "BotkoEN", "ZhukMM"]
tags=["regime", "disturbance of heat with drawal", "reactor plant", "pressure", "stop valve", "crisis of boiling", "stock coefficient"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"

+++

Heathydraulic calculations are a necessary component of the majority of design and technological development in nuclear power. 
As in the conditions of the NPP the way of check, traditional for equipment, and specification of results and conclusions of the aprioristic analysis on the basis of industrial tests can’t be realized, in some cases means of research and the forecast of parameters of heathydraulic processes in a circulating contour of the reactor are researches with application of heathydraulic program codes.

Calculation and study of regimes with the disturbance of the conditions of cooling the reactor plant from the side of secondary circuit with the reactor VVER is placed with basic task in the work, using the computer program codes, for the purpose of the determination of the correspondence of the calculated parameters by the established normative documentation to reception criteria.

On the base of the program codes RELAP-5, TRAC, TRACE were modelled and investigated the regimes of the work of reactor plant with the disturbance of cooling conditions from the side of the secondary circuit of reactor VVER#1000.v to article they were given the results of the analysis of regime with closing of the check valves of turbogenerator. 
The dependences obtained they made it possible to determine the maximum values of pressures and temperatures in the circulation loop, and to also estimate minimum reserves to the crisis of heat exchange. 
As a result established that with the appearance of each of the initial events occurs the wear and tear of security systems according to settings, transient processes are stabilized in the time, reserve to the crisis of boiling on the shells FUEL ELEMENT is ensured. 
Consequently, in the case of the not on the staff situation, connected with in question in the work regimes, the safety of reactor plant will be provide ford.

### References

1. Belozerov V.I., Zhuk M.M., Kuzina Yu.A., Ternovykh M. Yu. Physics and operational modes of the VVER61000 reactor. Moscow. MEPhI Publ. 2014. 291 p. (in Russian).
2. Belozerov V.I., Sergeev V.V., Kazantsev A.A., Pozdnyakov A.N., Kanyshev M. Yu. Neutron physical and thermohydraulic model VVER1000 for the instruction of personnel. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2008, no. 2, pp. 99–106 (in Russian).
3. Afrov A.M., Andriushechko S.A., Ukraintcev V.F., Vasil’ev B.Yu., Kosourov K.B., Semthenrov Yu.M., Kokosadze E.L., Ivanov E.A. VVER1000: Physical Bases of Operation, Nuclear Fuel, Safety. Moscow. Universitybook, Logos Publ. 2006. 488 p. (in Russian).
4. Logvinov S.A., Bezrukov Yu.A., Dragunov Yu.G. An Experimental Ground of Thermohydraulic Reliability of Reactors VVER. Moscow. IKTC Akademkniga Publ. 2004. 255 p. (in Russian).
5. Kuznetsov Yu.N. Heat Exchange in a Problem of Safety of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 296 p. (in Russian).
6. TRACEV5.0 Theory Manual. Field Equations, Solution Methods and Physical Models. DC 20555 – 0001. 672 p.
7. RELAP5/MOD3 Code Manual, Vol. 1: Code Structure, System Models, and Solution Methods, NUREG/CR5535. Idaho: National Engineering Laboratory. 1995. 418 p.
8. Loytsyanskiy L.G. Mechanics of Liquid and Gas: The Textbook for Higher Education Institutions. The 7th edition corrected. Moskow. Drofa Publ., 2003. 840 p. (in Russian).
9. Bragin V.A., BateninI.V.,Golovanov M.N., Levin G.L. Systems of Intra Reactor Monitoring of the NPP with VVER Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987. 128 p. (in Russian).
10. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo NParticle Transport Code, Version 5. X5 Monte Carlo Team. Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LAUR031987 (April, 2003).
11. Open FOAM User Guide Version 1.6. 2009.
12. Open FOAM Programmer’s Guide Version 1.6. 2009.
13. Idelchik I.E. Reference book on hydraulic resistances. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1975. 559 p. (in Russian).
14. Fomichev M.S. The Experimental Hydrodynamics of Nuclear Power Stations. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 246 p. (in Russian).
15. Abramovich G.N. Turbulent Mixture of Gas Jets. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1974. 272 p. (in Russian).
16. Abramovich G.N. Applied Gas Dynamics. Vol.1. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1987. 537 p. (in Russian).
17. Ganev I.H. Physics and Calculation of the Reactor. Ed. by N.A. Dolezhal. Edition 2nd. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1992. 496 p. (in Russian).
18. Petuhov B.S., Genin L.G. Heat Exchange in Nuclear Power Stations. Edition 3rd. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2003. 548 p. (in Russian).
19. Harrer J.M. Technology of Regulation of Nuclear Reactors. Ed. by I.Y. Yemelyanov. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1967. 492 p. (in Russian).
20. Kaplar Sh. E., Lisitsin I.S., Markov P.V., Marchikhina N.A. Development of Calculated Model and the Analysis of Some Transient Phenomenon’s in the Reactor KLT40S With Use of the SERPENT Code. The Nuclear power engineering. 2009, no. 1, pp. 39-47.