+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="07"
file="/pdf/2016/03/2016-03-article-07.pdf"
udc="621.039"
title="Methods for using computer training facilities in studies of special disciplines"
authors=["TashlykovOL", "ShchekleinSE", "TitovGP", "NosovDA", "TuchkovAM"]
tags=["nuclear power industry", "nuclear power system", "fast neutron reactor", "personnel training", "analytical simulator"]
rubric="training"
rubric_name="Personnel training"

+++

The paper considers the practical use of computer training facilities in training of personnel for nuclear power industry and their role in forming professional and special professional competences of graduating students.

The Ural Federal University’s Department of Nuclear Power Plants and Renewable Energy Sources possesses special training facilities for training of personnel for nuclear power plants with fast neutron reactors. Software tools and simulators, such as GEFEST, Joker and Syntes codes, a BN-800 analytical simulator and others, are heavily involved in the training process. 
A variety of computer-aided simulation systems is used by students for research projects.

The paper considers the structure and the components of the BN-800 training system used for training in control of the power unit’s reactor and turbine department processes. 
It also describes process control techniques and the reactor and NPP process control and visualization tools. 
Mathematical models are described, which are used for real!time modeling and simulation of the power unit’s neutronic, thermal-physical and thermal-hydraulic processes.

The use of the analytical simulator is illustrated by a laboratory research project entitled «BN-800 Reactor Power Maneuvering», which investigates the reactor facility power control modes in a power range of 100 – 80 – 100% of the rated power.

### References

1. Tashlykov O., Shcheklein S., Sesekin A., Chentsov A., Nosov Y., Smyshlaeva O. Ecological features of fast reactor nuclear power plants (NPPs) at all stages of their life cycle. WIT Transactions on Ecology and the Environment. 2014, v. 190, no. 2, pp. 907-918.
2. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E. Ekologicheskoye prognozirovaniye v yadernoy energetike XXI veka [Ecological forecasting in the nuclear power industry of the 21st century]. International scientific journal Alternativnaya energetika i ekologiya. 2015, no. 89 (172 173), pp. 50-58 (in Russian).
3. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Karpenko A.I., Bel’tukov A.I., Tuchkov A.M. Opytpodgotovki spetsialistov dlya innovatsionnoy yadernoy energetiki [Experience in training of personnel for innovative nuclear power]. XIVth Mezhdunarodnaya konferentsiya «Bezopasnost AES i podgotovka kadrov» [The 14th Int. Conf. «NPP Safety and Personnel Training»]. Obninsk, 2015, pp. 54-57 (in Russian).
4. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E. Novye tekhnologii podgotovki spetsialistov dlya innovatsionnogo energobloka AES s reaktorom BN800 [New technologies for training of personnel for an innovative NPP unit with a BN-800 reactor]. Novye obrazovatelnye tekhonologii v vuze: sbornik materialov nauchnometodicheskoy konferentsii [The 7th Int. Scient. Conf. «New Educational Technologies in Higher School»], 810 February 2010. In 2 parts. Part 2. Yekaterinburg: SEI HPE Ural State Technical University. 2010, pp. 401-406 (in Russian).
5. Shcheklein S.E., Tashlykov O.L., Velkin V.I., Shastin A.G., Dementev V.N., Markelov N.I., Sorokin Y.I. Opyt sotrudnichestva kontserna «Rosenergoatom» i Uralskogo Gosudarstvennogo Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta v oblasti podgotovki spetsialistov dlya tekhnicheskogo obsluzhivaniya i remonta oborudovaniya AES [Experience of cooperation of Rosenergoatom Concern and the Ural State Technical University in the field of personnel training for the maintenance and repair of the NPP equipment]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2004, no. 3, pp. 121-129 (in Russian).
6. Tashlykov O.L., Nosov D.A. Ispolzovaniye simulatorov TOMAS1 and TOMAS2 dlya modelirovaniya perekhodnykh rezhimov, vyzvannykh narusheniyami v remonte oborudovaniya AES [Use of the TOMAS1 and TOMAS2 simulators to model transients caused by failures in repair of the NPP equipment]. XI Mezhdunarodnaya konferentsiya «Bezopasnost AES i podgotovka kadrov – 2009» [The 11th Int. Conf. «NPP Safety and Personnel Training – 2009»]. Obninsk, 2009, v. 2, pp. 67-68 (in Russian).
7. Tashlykov O.L., Naumov А.А., Shcheklein S.E. Modelirovaniy proсessa zamorazhivaniya natriya v truboprovodakh s tselyu optimizatsii remonta reaktornykh ustanovok na bystrykh neytronakh [Modeling of the sodium freezing process in pipelines for the purpose of optimizing the repair of fast neutron reactor units]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 2, pp. 21-26 (in Russian).
8. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Klimova V.A., Naumov А.А. Modelirovaniye virtualnykh radiatsionnykh poley [Modeling of virtual radiation fields]. Distantsionnoye i virtualnoye obucheniye. 2011, no. 4, pp. 24-34 (in Russian).
9. Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N., Tashlykov O.L, Shcheklein S.E. Experimental and Theoretical Study of Organometallic RadiationProtective Materials Adapted to Radiation Sources with a Complex Isotopic Composition. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, no. 12, pp. 1451-1456.
10. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Lukyanenko V.Y., Mikhailova A.F., Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N., Коzlov А.V. Optimizatsiya sostava radiatsionnoy zashchity [Optimization of the radiation protection composition]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2015, no 4, pp. 36-42 (in Russian).
11. Balushkin F.A., Sesekin A.N., Tashlykov O.L., Cheblokov I.B., Shcheklein S.E., Chencov A.G. Ispolzovaniye metoda dinamicheskogo programmirovaniya dlya optimizatsii demontazha oborudovaniya energoblokov AES, vyvodimykh iz ekspluatatsii, s tseliyu minimizatsii oblucheniya [Using a dynamic programming method to optimize disassembly of the decommissioned NPP equipment for exposure minimization]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2009, No 4, pp. 169-176 (in Russian).
12. Grigoriev A.M., Ivanko E.E., Chencov A.G., Sesekin A.N., Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E. Resheniye zadach marshrutnoy optimizatsii primenitelno k radiatsionno opasnym obyektam s ispolzovaniyem superkompiyutera «Uran» [Solution of route optimization problems as applied to radiation hazardous installations using the Uran supercomputer]. XIIth Mezhdunarodnaya konferentsiya «Bezopasnost AES i podgotovka kadrov – 2011» [The 12th Int. Conf. «NPP Safety and Personnel Training – 2011»]. Obninsk, 2011, pp. 103-105 (in Russian).
13. Shcheklein S.E., Tashlykov O.L., Titiv G.P., Borisova E.V., Nosov D.A. Ispolzovaniye kompiyuternykh tekhnologiy v UGTUUPI pri podgotovke spetsialistov dlya atomnoy energetiki [Use of computer technologies at the Ural State Technical University in training of personnel for nuclear power industry]. Distantsionnoye i virtualnoye obucheniye, 2009, no 9. pp. 4-16 (in Russian).
14. Bel’tukov A.I., Karpenko A.I., Poluyaktov S.A., Tashlykov O.L., Titov G.P., Tuchkov A.M., Shcheklein S.E. Atomnye elektrostantsii s reaktorami na bystrykh neytronakh s natriyevym teplonositelem [Nuclear power plants with fast neutron sodium cooled reactors]. In 2 parts, part 1. Ed. S.Ye. Shcheklein, O.L. Tashlykov. Yekaterinburg. Ural Federal University Publ., 2013, v. 1, 548 p. (in Russian).