+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:14:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/03/08.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="81"
udc="001.6:621.39"
title="The metascientific foundations of nuclear knowledge management"
original_title="Метанаучные основания управления ядерными знаниями"
authors=["KankeVA"]
tags=["knowledge management", "methods of nuclear knowledge management", "metascience", "series of interpretative theories", "competences"]
rubric="training"
rubric_name="Personnel training"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.3.08"

+++

It is noted that achievements by metascience are insufficiently used in the development of the theory of knowledge management including nuclear knowledge. The phenomenon of theory deserves paying special attention because knowledge means the theories mastered by people. There is no such knowledge about subjects and objects, processes or phenomena that would not be the representation of theories. That is why the main provisions of metascience are first disclosed by the author in the present paper and following this they are applied for characterization of 15 important problematic issues of the nuclear knowledge management theory.

Management of intratheoretical concepts, i.e. the principles, laws and variables, is implemented using four methods, namely, deduction, experiment, induction and correction of the original underlying principles. Management of theories is implemented by the use of three methods: problematization, innovation and interpretation. Multiplication of theory management cycles results in the generation of series of interpretative theories. Subject matter of each separate theory is exposed in the composition of the series from the viewpoint of the most well developed concept. Conclusion is made that series of interpretative theories constitute the basic element (unit) of knowledge.

Significant place is occupied in the characterization of outstanding problems of nuclear knowledge management by the correlation between the articulated and practical, as well as between tacit and explicit knowledge. Mechanism is examined for implementation of the discourse leading to the development of the group knowledge. Characteristic is given of the status of competence, skills and hands-on experience of carriers of nuclear knowledge.Approaches to the preservation and development of theories are discussed.

### References

1. Strengthening the agency’s activities related to nuclear science, technology and applications. International Atomic Energy Agency. General conference. Resolution GC(46)/ RES/11. September 2002. 22 p.
2. Nuclear engineering education: a competence based approach to curricula development. Vienna, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2014. 39 р.
3. Status and trends in nuclear education. Vienna, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2011. 226 р.
4. Knowledge management and its implementation in nuclear organizations. Vienna, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2016. 52р.
5. Comparative analysis of methods and tools for nuclear knowledge preservation. Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency, 2011. 102 p.
6. Nuclear knowledge management glossary. Vienna, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005. 22 p.
7. Drucker P.F. The age of discontinuity: guidelines to our changing society. London, Transaction Publishers, 1968. 394 p.
8. Senge P. The fifth discipline: the art and practice of the learning organization. New York, Doubleday, 1990. 371 p.
9. Nonaka I., Takeuchi H. The knowledge creating company: how Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation. New York, Oxford University Press, 1995. 284 p.
10. Kanke V.A. The philosophy of management. Moscow. Knorus Publ., 2010. 392 p. (in Russian).
11. Kanke V.A. History, philosophy and methodology of engineering and computer science. Moscow, Yurajt Publ., 2013. 409 p. (in Russian).
12. Kanke V.A. The methodology of scientific knowledge. Moscow, OmegaL Publ., 2013. 255 p. (in Russian).
13. Polanyi М.The tacit dimension. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1966. 108 p.
14. Kanke V.A. Competences in the light of metascience. AlmaMater. Journal of Higher School, 2015, no. 9, pp. 44–48. (in Russian).
15. Habermas J. Moralbewsstsein und kommunikatives Handeln. Frankfurt am Main, Suhrkamp, 1983. 208 p. (in German).
16. Lyotard J.F. Le diffйrend. Paris, de Minuit, 1983. 279 p. (in French).