+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="09"
file="/pdf/2016/03/2016-03-article-09.pdf"
udc="621.039.586.001.57"
title="Using Johnson-Cook plasticity model to drop test numerical simulation containers for spent fuel transportation"
authors=["SobolevAV", "RadchenkoMV"]
tags=["SNF container", "drop to pin", "Johnson-Cook plasticity model", "Johnson-Cook plasticity model parameters calculation"]
rubric="fuelcycle"
rubric_name="Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"

+++

The article presents results of pin drop test numerical simulation to containers for spent fuel transportation TUK-128. 
This situation applies to design basis accident during transportation of spent nuclear fuel by road outside a hazardous manufacture (outside nuclear power plant site or processing plant).

Deformation calculation and numerical simulation at failing container for transportation of SNF on the pin from height of 1 meter runs in elastoplasticfield of work construction materials. 
It is important that there are many of options for setting construction materials plastic properties. 
In this the simulation results depend significantly on the choice of way to giving plastic properties.

The most common approach taking into account plasticity is the set tabulated function gives relationship between stresses and plastic deformations. 
This plasticity description does not account for not only temperature dependence plasticity but also kinematic hardening (the dependence elastic limit of deformation intensity). 
Using this plasticity model gives significant reduction to computational complexity, that especially important if required dozen of cases computational analysis.

Another, a more adequate approach to define plasticity is to take into account dependence of yield stress not only on the strain and its intensity, but also on the temperature (model plasticity Johnson-Cook). 
In this case, for each type of structural material needed to determine 57 parameters. 
Currently, there is no unequivocal method for determining this parameters, so the article provides method for their calculation. 
The disadvantage of JohnsonCook plasticity model is a significant increase in computational complexity. 
For this reason, the present work provides comparative analysis of calculation results with define
plasticity by JohnsonCook model and tabulated functions.

Modelling is carried out for the two calculation cases: fall at the hull cover (made of stainless steel); falling on the hull bottom (made of ductile cast iron). 
Considered variants to take into account construction materials plastic properties compared with the results of drop tests to containers TUK-128.

Impact modeling performed by finite element method with using LS-DYNA program.

### References

1. Droste B. Testing of type B packages in Germany to environments beyond regulatory test standards. Packaging, Transport, Storage & Security of Radioactive Material. 2007, v. 18, no. 2, pp. 73-85.
2. Musolff A., Quercetti T., Mьller K., Droste B., Komann S. Drop test program with the halfscale model CASTOR HAW/TB2. PATRAM 2010.
3. Borovkov A.I., Grunin V.V., Lutman Yu.L. Issledovaniya vertikal’nogo padeniya konteijnera s otrabotavshym yadernym toplivom [Study of vertical drop container of spent nuclear fuel]. St. Petersburg State Polytechnical University Journal, 2013, no. 1, pp. 210-214 (in Russian).
4. International Atomic Energy Agency Safety Requirements. Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials, No. TSR1, 2005. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2009 (in Russian).
5. Jaksic N., Nilsson K.F. Finite element modelling of the one meter drop test on a steel bar for the CASTOR cask. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2009, v. 239, no. 2, pp. 201-213.
6. Nevskiy S.A., Sarychev V.D., Komissarova I.A., Gromov V.E. Polyphase model of plastic deformation of metals. Vestnik Tambovskogo Universiteta. Ser.: Estestvennye i tehnicheskie nauki. 2013, v. 18, iss. 4, pp. 1848-1849 (in Russian).
7. Kolmogorov V.L. Deformacii. Napryazheniya. Razrushenie [Strain. Stress. Demage]. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ.,1970. 229 p. (in Russian).
8. Masterov V.A. Berkovsky V.S. Teoriya plasticheskoj deformacii i obrabotka metallov davleniem [Theory of plastic deformation and presser metal forming]. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ.,1989. 400 p. (in Russian).
9. Kudinov V.A. Predelnie plasticheskie deformacii metallov [Limits the plastic deformation of metals]. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ.,1989. 176 p. (in Russian).
10. Rybin V.V. Bol’shie plasticheskie deformacii i razrushenie metallov [Large plastic deformation and fracture of metals]. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1986. 224 p. (in Russian).
11. Bogatov А.А., Mizhirickij O.I., Smirnov S.V. Resurs plastichnosti metallov pri obrabotke davleniem [Resource plasticity metals by pressure treatment]. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1984. 144 p. (in Russian).
12. Unksov E.P. Teoriya plasticheskih deformacij metallov [Theory plastic deformation of metals]. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1983. 598 p. (in Russian).
13. Ivanov K.M., Lyasnikov A.V., Novikov L.A., Yurgenson E.E. Matematicheskoe modelirovanie processov obrabotki davleniem [Mathematical modeling forming processes]. – St. Petersburg: Inventeks Publ., 1997. 268 p. (in Russian).
14. Botkin A.V. Nauchnometodicheskie osnovy proektirovaniya processov uglovogo pressovaniya. Doct. Diss. [Scientificallymethodical bases to designing angular pressing process. Doct. Diss.]. Ufa, 2013. 282 p. (in Russian).
15. Qiao L., Zencker U., Musolff A., Komann S. Dynamic Finite Element Analyses of a Spent Fuel Transport and Storage Cask with Impact Limiters by 9 Meter Drop Tests. SIMULIA Customer Conference, 2011.
16. Schwer L. Optional StrainRate Forms for the JohnsonCook Constitutive Model and the Role of the Parameter Epsilon0. VIth European LSDYNA Users’ Conference, 2007.
17. Trana E., Zecheru T., Bugaru M., Chereches T. JohnsonCook Constitutive Model for OL 37 Steel. VIth WSEAS Int. Conf. on System Science and Simulation in Engineering. Venice, Italy, Nov 2123, 2007, pp. 269-273.
18. Kuz’kin V.А., Mihalyuk D.S. Numerical modeling usage to identify parameters of Johnson-Cook model for highspeed aluminum deformation. Vychislitej’naya mehanika sploshnyhsred. 2010, v. 3, no. 1, pp. 32-43 (in Rissian).
19. Equipment and pipelines strength analysis norms for nuclear power plants (PNAE G7 00286). Gosatomenergonadzor SSSR. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 525 p. (in Russian)
20. Poluhin P.I., Gun G.Ya., Galkin А.М. Resistance to plastic deformation of metals and alloys. Handbook. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1983. 352 p. (in Russian).