+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:11:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="11"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/03/11.pdf"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Investigations for the substantiation of high-temperature nuclear power generation technology using fast sodiumcooled reactor for hydrogen production and other innovative applications (part 1)"
authors=["KalyakinSG", "KozlovFA", "SorokinAP", "BogoslovskayaGP", "IvanovAP","KonovalovMA", "MorozovAV", "StogovVY"]
tags=["fast reactor", "high-temperature", "sodium", "hydrogen production", "pooltype configuration", "neutronics", "thermal physics", "safety issues, steels"]
rubric="physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name="Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"

+++

Neutronics and thermal physics studies of BN-VT reactor installation with 600MW thermal power demonstrated the possibility in principle to achieve the required parameters of high-temperature fast reactor for production of large quantities of hydrogen on the basis, for instance, of one of thermal chemical cycles or high-temperature hydrolysis with high thermal efficiency of use of electric power. 
Relatively small dimensions, the type of coolant, selection of fissile material and structural materials allow developing nuclear reactor with particular inherent properties (exclusion of promptneutron reactor power excursions, removal of decay heat in passive mode) while ensuring enhanced nuclear and radiation safety.

Composition of BN-VT reactor facility includes sodiumcooled fast reactor, three cooling loops for emergency heat removal and three sets of equipment of the secondary cooling loop for heat transfer from the reactor to chemical installations generating hydrogen or to gasturbine plant for supplying chemical equipment with electric power.
Composition of each of the cooling loops includes intermediate heat exchanger arranged inside the reactor vessel, centrifugal pump and pipeline for removal and reintroduction of sodium in the reactor core. 
Contemporary requirements on the safetyand financial performance of future generations of nuclear reactors were taken into consideration in the development of the reactor under study. 
Implemented calculation studies demonstrated that penetration of hydrogen within the limits of permissible allowances produce practically no effect on the neutronics and safety parameters of the reactor. 
Solution of the problem of fuel pin stability was mitigated due to the selection of low thermal load on fuel pins. 
Application of EP-912V-D steel as a possible optional structural material was examined.

Continued studies of heatresistant materials and their behavior under irradiation are required.

### References

1. Goverdovsky A.A., Kalyakin S.G., Rachkov V.I. Alternativnye strategii razvitiyа jаdernoy еnergetiki v XXI veke [Alternative strategies of nuclear power development in the XXI century]. Teploenergetika, 2014, no. 5, pp. 3-9 (in Russian).
2. Rachkov V.I., Kalyakin S.G. Innovatsionnaya yadernaya tehnologiya – osnova krupnomasshtabnoy yadernoy energetiki [Innovative nuclear power technology – the basis of large-scale nuclear power engineering]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2014, no.1, pp. 5-16 (in Russian).
3. Rachkov V.I. Nauchno-tehnicheskie problemy formirovaniyа krupnomasshtabnoy yаdernoy еnergetiki [The scientific and technical problems of the formation of large-scale nuclear power]. Energosberezhenie i vodopodgotovka, 2013, no. 5, pp. 2-8. (in Russian)
4. Rachkov V.I. Razrabotka tehnologiy zakrytogo yadernogo toplivnogo cikla s bystrymi reaktorami dlya krupnomasshtabnoy yadernoy energetiki [Working out of technology of the closed nuclear fuel cycle with fast reactors for the large-scale nuclear power]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2013, no. 3, pp. 5-14 (in Russian).
5. Rachkov V.I., Arnoldov M.N., Efanov A.D., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Loginov N.I., Orlov Yu.I., Sorokin A.P. Zhidkie metally v yadernoy, termoyadernoy energetike i drugikh innovatsionnykh tehnologiyakh [Liquid metals in nuclear, thermonuclear power engineering and other innovative technologies]. Teploenergetika, 2014, no. 5, pp. 20-30 (in Russian).
6. Rachkov V.I., Kalyakin S.G., Kuharchuk O.F., Orlov Yu.I., Sorokin A.P. Ot pervoy AES do YaEU IV pokoleniya (k 60-letiyu Pervoy AES) [From the First Nuclear Power Plant to Fourth-Generation Nuclear Power Installations (on the 60-th Anniversary of the Word’s First Nuclear Power Plant)]. Teploenergetika. 2014, no. 5, pp. 11-19 (in Russian).
7. International Atomic Energy Agency, Hydrogen as an Energy Carrier and its Production by Nuclear Power: IAEA-TECDOC-1085, IAEA, Vienna, 1999.
8. Morozov A.V., Sorokin A.P. Sposoby polucheniyа vodoroda i perspektivy ispolzovaniyа vysokotemperaturnogo bystrogo natrievogo reaktora dlyа ego proizvodstva [Methods for producing hydrogen and perspectives of using high-temperature sodium-cooled fast reactor for its production]. 21th Int. Conference on Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology (SMIRT-21), a seminar on high-temperature projects, 14-15 November 2011, Kalpakkam, India (in Russian).
9. Innovation in Nuclear Energy Technology. – NEA, N. 6103, OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, 2007.
10. Albitskaya E.S. Razvitie yaderno-energeticheskikh sistem [Nuclear power system development]. Atomnaya tehnika za rubezhom. 2013, no. 11, pp. 3-16 (in Russian).
11. Poplavsky V.M., Zabudko A.N., Petrov E.E. Fizicheskie kharakteristiki i problemy sozdaniya natrievogo bystrogo reaktora kak istochnika vysokopotentsialnoy teplovoy energii dlya proizvodstva vodoroda i drugikh vysokotemperaturnykh tehnologiy [Physical characteristics and problems of sodium-cooled fast reactor development as a source of high-potential thermal energy for hydrogen production and other high-temperature technologies]. Atomnaya energiya. 2009, v. 106, no. 3, pp. 129-134 (in Russian).
12. Khorasanov G.L., Kolesov V.V., Korobeynikov V.V. K voprosu polucheniya vodoroda na baze yadernykh tehnologij [On the question of hydrogen production on the basis of nuclear technology]. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2015, no. 2, pp. 81-87 (in Russian).
13. Khorasanov G.L., Ivanov A.P., Blokhin A.I. Konversiya metana s ispolzovaniem vodyanogo para bystryh yadernyh reaktorov [Methane reforming using the water steam from fast nuclear reactors]. Alternativnaya energetika, 2004, no. 6, p. 57 (in Russian).
14. Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P. Sostoyаnie i zadachi issledovaniy po tehnologii vysokotemperaturnogo natrievogo teplonositelyа [Status and challenges of investigations on high-temperature sodium coolant technology]. 21th Int. Conference on Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology (SMIRT-21), a seminar on high-temperature projects, 14-15 Nov 2011, Kalpakkam, India (in Russian).
15. Kazansky Yu.A., Troyanov M.F., Matveev V.I. Issledovaniya fizicheskikh kharakteristik reaktora BN-600 [Research of physical characteristics of BN-600 reactor]. Atomnaya energiya, 1983, v. 55, iss. 1, pp. 9-14 (in Russian).
16. Nevzorov B.A., Zotov V.V., Ivanov V.A., Starkov O.V., Kraev N.D., Umnyashkin E.B., Solovyov V.A. Korroziyа konstrukcionnykh materialov v zhidkikh schelochnykh metallakh [Corrosion of structural materials in liquid alkali metals]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1977 (in Russian).
17. Beskorovajny N.M., Yoltuhovsky A.G. Konstruktsionnye materialy i zhidkometallicheskie teplonositeli [Structural materials and liquid metal coolants]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983 (in Russian).
18. Zhang J., Marcille T.F. and Kapernick R. Theoretical Analysis of Corrosion by Liquid Sodium and Sodium-Potassium Alloys. Corrosion, 2008, v. 64, no. 7, pp. 563-573.
19. Thorley A.W. Mass Transfer Behavior of SS in Flowing Sodium Environment at Different Oxygen Levels. 4th Int. Conf. on liquid metal engineering and technology. Avignon, France, 1988.
20. Koltsov A.G., Roschupkin V.V., Lyahovitsky M.М., Sobol N.L., Pokrasin M.A. Eksperimentalnoe issledovanie fiziko-mehanicheskikh svojstv konstruktsionnoj stali EP-912 [Experimental research of physics and mechanical properties of structural steel EP-912]. Moscow. Available at http://archive.nbuv.gov.ua/portal/soc_gum/vsunu/2011_12_1/Kolcov.pdf (in Russian).
21. Metally i splavy: marki i khimicheskiy sostav. Sostavitel i redactor Bekkerev I.V. [Metals and alloys: brands and a chemical composition. Composer and editor Bekkerev I.V.]. Ul’yanovsk. UlSTU Publ., 2007. – ISBN 978-59795-0042-3. Available at http://www.bibliotekar.ru/spravochnik-73/index.htm (in Russian).