+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:09:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="13"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/03/13.pdf"
udc="621.039"
title="Modeling of natural circulation for the inherent safety analysis of sodium cooled fast reactors"
authors=["BochkarevAS", "AlekseevPN", "KorsunAS", "KharitonovVS"]
tags=["fast reactor", "BN", "PHENIX", "emergency heat removal system", "inherent safety", "decay heat removal", "natural circulation", "pump"]
rubric="physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name="Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"

+++

The paper discusses a set of developed integrated onedimensional models of thermal-hydraulic processes that contribute to the removal of decay heat in a BN-type reactor. 
The assumptions and constraints involved in onedimensional equations of unsteady natural convection in closed circuits have been analyzed. 
It has been shown that the calculated values of the primary circuit sodium temperature and flow rate in conditions with a loss of heat removal and with a forced circulation of the primary coolant are in a reasonable agreement with the results of a benchmark experiment in the PHENIX reactor. 
The model makes it possible to assess the effects general thermophysical and geometrical parameters and the selected technology have on the efficiency of passive heat removal by the natural coolant convection in the reactor tank and in the emergency heat removal system’s intermediate circuit and by the heat transfer through the reactor vessel. 
The model is a part of an integrated algorithm used to assess the inherent safety level of advanced fast neutron reactors and is intended primarily to develop, at the early conceptual design stage, the recommendations and requirements with respect to the reactor equipment parameters leading to an increase in the reactor inherent safety. 
The model will be used to identify the set of quantitative thermalhydraulic criteria that have an effect on the dynamics of emergency transients leading to a potential loss of integrity by the reactor safety barriers, and to formulate such limits for the defined criteria as would cause, if observed, the requirement for the safety barrier integrity to be met under any combination of the accident initiating events.

### References

1. Alekseev P.N., Asmolov V.G., Gagarinskiy A.Yu., Kukharkin N.E., Semchenkov Yu.M., Sidorenko V.A., Subbotin S.A., Tsibulskiy V.F., Shtrombah Ya.I. On the Russian Nuclear Power Industry Development Strategy until 2050. In Proceedings of the VIIIth International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power Industry». Moscow, 2012 (in Russian).
2. General Provisions for Ensuring the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants. NP-001-15. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2015, 30 p. (in Russian).
3. Gordon B.G., Piskunova N.A. On Recommendations For Increasing The Inherent Safety Of Nuclear Reactors. Atomnaya energiya, 2011, v. 110, no. 2, pp. 73-137 (in Russian).
4. Tanju S. A Review of Inherent Safety Characteristics of Metal Alloy Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactor Fuel Against Postulated Accidents. Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 2015, v. 47, no. 3, pp. 227-239.
5. Burgazzi L. Analysis of Solutions for Passively Activated Safety Shutdown Devices for SFR. Nuclear Engineering and Design, 2013, v. 260, pp. 47-53.
6. Ashurko Yu.M., Andreeva K.A., Bur’evsky I.V., Volkov A.V., Egorov A.V., Kuznetsov I.A., Korobeynikova L.V., Matveev V.I., Solomonova N.V., Khomyakov Yu.S., Tsarapkina A.N. A Study Into the SVRE Effects on the Safety of a Large Sodium Fast Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika, 2014, no. 3, pp. 5-14 (in Russian).
7. Alekseev P., Delpech M., Ilyin D. Improvement of the Safety Potential for the Lead-Cooled Fast Reactors. Proc. of Conf. on «Design and Safety of Advanced Nucl. Power Plants», Tokyo, Japan, 1992, p. 9.
8. Alekseev P.N., Bochkarev A.S. Potential of the Inherent Safety of a Reactor. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2013, v. 4, no. 5, pp. 1-5 (in Russian).
9. Stauff N., Buiron L., Fontaine B., Rimpault G. Methodology for Designing a Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactor with Inherent Safety. Nuclear Technology, 2013, v. 181, no. 2, pp. 241-250.
10. Gandini A., Salvatores M., Slessarev I. Balance of Power in ADS Operation and Safety. Annals of Nuclear Energy, 1999, v. 27, no. 1, p. 71.
11. Qvist S. Optimizing the Design of Small Fast Spectrum Battery-Type Nuclear Reactors. Energies, 2014, no. 7, pp. 4910-4937.
12. Wade D.C, Chang Y.I. The Integral Fast Reactor (IFR) Concept: Physics of Operation and Safety. In Proceedings of the International Topical Meeting on Advances in Reactor Physics Mathematics and Computation. Paris, France, 27 April 1987.
13. Chen X., Suzuki T., Boccaccini M., Rineiski A., Maschek W., Morita K. Steady-State and Transient Analyses for ADT’s (Fertile-free Fuels) Domain IV. Technical Meeting on the CRP: Studies of Advanced Reactor Technology Options for Effective Incineration of Radioactive Waste. Hefei, October 22-26, 2004.
14. Kuzmin A.M. Reactivity Coefficients and Asymptotic Safety Analysis. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 1997. 60 p. (in Russian).
15. Kuznetsov I.A., Bagdasarov Yu.E., Ashurko Yu.M. Role of Fast Reactor Physical Characteristics in Limiting the Consequences of Hypothetical Accidents. Atomic Energy, 1983, v. 54, no. 2, pp. 103-108.
16. Slattery J.C. Momentum, Energy and Mass Transfer in Continua, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1972, 682 p.
17. Alekseev P.N., Bochkarev A.S., Korsun A.S., Kharitonov V.S. Modeling of Thermal- Hydraulic Processes in Passive Heat Removal Systems for Fast Sodium Cooled Reactors. Vestnik natsionalnogo issledovatelskogo yadernogo universiteta «MIFI», 2014. v. 3, no. 3, pp. 362-367 (in Russian).
18. Subhash Ch. Safety Aspects of Intermediate Heat Transport and Decay Heat Removal Systems of Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactors. Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 2015, v. 47, no. 3, pp. 260-266.
19. Kazumi A., Dufourb P., Hongyic Y., Glatzd J., Kime Y., Ashurko Yu., Hillg R., Utoh N. A Summary of Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactor Development. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 2014 , v. 77, pp. 247-265.
20. Zaryugin D.G., Poplavskij V.M., Rachkov V.I., Sorokin A.P., Shvetsov Yu.E., Rogozhkin S.A., Shepelev S.F. Computational and Experimental Validation of the Planned Emergency Heat Removal System for BN-1200. Atomnaya energiya, 2014, no. 4, pp. 271-277 (in Russian).
21. Mitenkov F.M., Novinskij E.G., Budov V.M. Primary Coolant Circuit Circulation Pumps for NPPs. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 320 p. (in Russian).
22. Benchmark Analyses on the Natural Circulation Test Performed During the PHENIX End- of-Life Experiments, IAEA-TECDOC-1703, Vienna, Austria, IAEA, 2013, 169 p.