+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:08:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="14"
file="/pdf/2016/03/2016-03-article-14.pdf"
udc="519.87:621.039.5"
title="Degenerate optimization problems and competitive NPPs"
authors=["KlimenkoAV"]
tags=["degenerate optimization problem", "economy", "power", "electric power system", "power plant", "nuclear power plant", "optimality", "nonoptimality", "rate of discount", "competitive",
"noncompetitive"]
rubric="economics"
rubric_name="Economics of nuclear power"

+++

Optimization of major systems of economy and power leads to degenerate high 
dimensionality solutions. 
This very strong mathematical complicating. 
However it allows to consider the future development of power as teamwork of nuclear power plants (NPPs), power plants (PPs) on coal, PPs on gas. 
System optimization of parameters NPPs is for this purpose necessary.

If PP certain type has not entered into the optimal plan for development of a electric power system it by definition is nonoptimal and, hence, is noncompetitive.

NPP can enter into the optimal plan for development of an electric power system. 
Thus, if in locallyoptimal plans for development of a electric power system the power units placed earlier in operation (NPPs) after their work on some length of time interrupt loading execution (power supply) to “zero” for the term exceeding procedural works it testifies about nonoptimal the chosen parameters and operating modes. 
Such NPPs show competitiveness only on length of time when the electric power system allows them to bear loading.

If the power units placed in operation (NPPs) stop the work (are removal from operation) before design service life not for the reasons of «moral» obsolescence it testifies about nonoptimal the chosen parameters and operating modes. 
And it too testifies to insufficient competitiveness of these NPPs.

As the competitive can be considered NPP which was included into the optimal plan for development of a electric power system and has fulfilled without interruptions in a mode of execution of loading on power supply design service life.

The analysis of an optimality and competitiveness NPPs leads to following conclusions for Russia.

To this day in Russia any NPP, any nuclear technology of a nuclear fuel cycle (NFC) were not optimized by economic criterion in the fuel power complex system on purpose to create commercial NPPs and nuclear technologies.

As system optimizing calculations of power of Russia have shown, that studied variants fast NPPs (SVBR-100, BN-1200 (threecircuit), BREST-1200) were included not into all optimal plans there is a doubt in an optimality of these chosen parameters NPPs and them NFCs though difficult multiple parameters researches are conducted throughout decades.

### References

1. Klimenko A.V. Degenerate optimization problems of economy and power. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 3, pp. 144-154 (in Russian).
2. Klimenko A.V. Degenerate optimization problems of economy and power engineering. Nuclear Energy and Technology. 2015, no. 1, pp.195-201.
3. Klimenko A.V. Nuclear power which has a future. Proc. XXIIIth Symp. «Neutron and physical problems of atomic engineering with the closed fuel cycle (Neutronics-2012)». Obninsk. FGUP GNC RFFEI Publ., 2013, v. 1, pp. 107-124 (in Russian).
4. Klimenko A.V. Mathematical model of optimization of an electric power system and its application: the Monography. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2010. 292 p. (in Russian).
5. Klimenko A.V. System of restrictions for input of power units in operation in model of optimization of development of a power supply system. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Ser. Fizika yadernych reaktorov. 2011, iss. 1, pp.80-98 (in Russian).
6. Klimenko A.V. Objective function for input of power units in operation in model of optimization of development of a power supply system and algorithm of optimization. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i techniki. Ser. Fizika yadernych reaktorov. 2011, iss. 1, pp. 99-112 (in Russian).
7. Klimenko A.V. Whether there can be a nuclear power to competitive energy in the free market. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 17-28 (in Russian).
8. Klimenko A.V. Degenerate optimization problems and optimality of NPPs. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 4, pp. 133-143 (in Russian).
9. Nuclear power. Problems and prospects. Expert judgements. Moscow. Institut Atomnoj Energii im. I.V. Kurchatova Publ., 1989 (in Russian).
10. Reactor installation SVBR100. Avaiable at: www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/ru/projects/svbr100.php (accessed Nov., 05th 2015).
11. Rachkov V.I., Poplavskij V.M., Tsibulya A.M., Bagdasarov Yu.E., Vasil’ev B.A., KamaninYu.L., Osipov S.L., Kuzavkov N.G., Ershov V.N., Ashirmetov M.R. The concept of the perspective power unit with fast sodium reactor BN-1200. Atomnaya energiya. 2010, v. 108, no. 4, pp. 201206 (in Russian).
12. The white book of nuclear power. Ed. by prof. E.O. Adamov. Moscow, GUP NIKIET Publ., 1998 (in Russian).
13. Pivovarov V.A. One circuit boiling water reactor for the closed fuel cycle. Optimum variant. REA. 2009, no. 9, pp. 3741 (in Russian).
14. Ponomarev L.I., Gulevich A.V., Zemskov E.A., Seliverstov V.V., Konev V.N., Degtyarev A.M., Karmanov F.I., Sidorkin S.F., Myasnikov A.A., Fejnberg O.S., Gladush G.G., Fursov B.I., Seregin M.B., Kuznetsov A.Yu., Lizin A.A. Substantiation of the strategy of a transmutation of minor actinides (MA) in the closed nuclear fuel cycle. Report of JSC «Koordinacionnyj issledovatel’skij centr po probleme myuonnogo kataliza i ekzoticheskikh kvantovyh system (ANO MUCATEX)». Inv. no. 02/NIR10.12.2010. No. gosregistracii 01201065196. Moscow, 2010 (in Russian).
15. The Future of Nuclear Power. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003.
16. Update on the Cost of Nuclear Power by Yangbo Du and John E. Parsons. 09004, May 2009. Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research. A Joint Center of the Department of Economics, MIT Energy Initiative, and Sloan School of Management.
17. The Future of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011.
18. Klimenko A.V. What Safety should Achieve from Nuclear Power Plants?. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i techniki. Ser. Fizika yadernych reaktorov. 2015, iss. 5, pp. 94-107 (in Russian).
19. Gorodkov S.G., Klimenko A.V., Kosovan S., Marina J.S. Is it Possible to Reduce Energy Costs Without Using Nuclear Power Engineering?. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i techniki. Ser. Fizika yadernych reaktorov. 2001, iss. 4, pp. 77-89 (in Russian).
20. Gorodkov S.G., Klimenko A.V., Kosovan S., Marina J.S. Is it Possible to Reduce Energy Costs Without Using Nuclear Power Engineering? Atomwirtschaft (atw), International Journal for Nuclear Power. 2003, no. 2 (Feb), pp. 92-101.
21. Shevelev Y.V., Klimenko A.V. Effective economics of the nuclear fuel and energy complex. Moscow, RGGU Publ., 1996. 736 p. (in Russian).