+++

categories="article"
date="2016-10-02T01:06:53+03:00"
issue="2016-03"
issue_name="2016 - #03"
number="16"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/03/16.pdf"
udc="539.07, 616.71"
title="Approach to radionuclide therapy dosimetry planning"
authors=["LysakYV", "DyominVM", "KlimanovVA", "NarkevichBY", "RomodanovVL"]
tags=["radionuclide therapy", "Monte-Carlo method", "radiopharmaceuticals", "control of basic doses", "planar stratigraphy"]
rubric="medicine"
rubric_name="Nuclear medicine and biology"

+++

Control of radiation dose absorbed in the nidus represents one of the challenging issues in the implementation of radionuclide therapy (RNT). 
Approach is presented in the present study to the assessment of the value of activity of the radiopharmaceutical (RPH) accumulated in the tumor based on the obtained planar scintigraphic images of the patient’s body and calculation of radiation transfer by Monte-Carlo method taking into account the processes of absorption and scattering in the patient’s biological tissues and elements of the gammachamber structure. 
The phases in the obtaining the required data included simulation of scintigraphic study in the gammachamber of the vial containing RPH activity injected to the patient located at the fixed distance from the collimator and implementation of similar study with identical measurement geometry in the conditions when the same value of RPH activity is introduced in the nidus inside the patient’s body. 
Adapted Fischer-Snyder human body phantom was used in the MCNP input file for obtaining corresponding calculation results. 
Calculation was performed within the framework of the above model for different nidus dimensions and different depths of tumor positioning inside the patient’s body for the case of application of RPH on the basis of both mixed β-γemitting (<sup>131</sup>I, <sup>177</sup>Lu) and pure β-emitting (<sup>89</sup>Sr, <sup>90</sup>Y) therapeutic radionuclides. 
The described methodology allows implementing with sufficient accuracy the assessment of doses absorbed within the zones of interest on the basis of the data of patient’s planar stratigraphy.

### References

1. Sgouros G. Dosimetry of internal emitters. J. Nucl. Med., 2005, v. 46, iss. 1, pp. 18-27.
2. Fischer D.R. Assessments for high dose radionuclide therapy treatment planning. Radiation Protection Dosimetry, 2003, v. 105, no. 4, pp. 581-586.
3. Plyku D., Loeb D.M., Prideaux A.R., Baechler S., Wahl R.L., Sgouros G., Hobbs R.F. Strengths and weaknesses of planar wholebody method of 153Sm dosimetry for patients with metastatic osteosarcoma and comparison with threedimensional dosimetry. Cancer Biotherapy and Radiopharmaceuticals, 2015, v. 30, no. 9, pp. 369-379.
4. Siegel J.A., Thomas S.R., Stubbs J.B., Stabin M.G., Hays M.T., Koral K.F., Robertson J.S., Howell R.W., Wessels B.W., Fisher D.R., Weber D.A., Brill A.B. MIRD Pamphlet No. 16: Techniques for Quantitative Radiopharmaceutical Biodistribution Data Acquisition and Analysis for Use in Human Radiation Dose Estimates. J. Nucl. Med., 1999, v. 40, pp. 37-61.
5. Klyopov A.N., Kurachenko Yu.A., Matusevich E.S. Application of mathematical modeling methods in nuclear medicine. Obninsk. SOCIN Publ., 2006. 204 p. (in Russian).
6. He B., Du Y., Song X., Segars W.P., Frey E.C. A Monte Carlo and physical phantom evaluation of quantitative 111In SPECT. Phys. Med. Biol., 2005, v. 50, no. 17, pp. 4169–4185.
7. Taschereau R., Chatziioannou A.F. MonteCarlo simulations of absorbed dose in a mouse phantom from 18uorine compounds. Med. Phys., 2007, v. 34, no. 3, pp. 1026–1036.
8. Ljungberg M., SjogreenGleisner K. The accuracy of absorbed dose estimates in tumours determined by quantitative SPECT: A Monte Carlo study. Acta Oncol, 2011, v. 50, pp. 981-989.
9. Saadzadeh E., Sarkar S., TehraniFard A.A., Ay M.R., Khosravi H.R., Loudos G. 3D calculation of absorbed dose for 131Itargeted radiotherapy: a MonteCarlo study. Radiation Protection Dosimetry, 2012, v. 150, no. 3, pp. 298-305.
10. Jonsson L., Ljungberg M., Strand S.E. Evaluation of accuracy in activity calculations for the conjugate view method from Monte-Carlo simulated scintillation camera images using experimental data in an anthropomorphic phantom. Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 2005, v. 46, pp. 1679-1686.
11. Vlasova O.P., Klyopov A.N., Garbuzov P.I., Drozdovsky B.J., Matusevich E.S., Oleynik N.A., Spychenkova O.N. Iodine123 Scintigraphy for Dosymetric Planning of Radioiodine Therapy of Thyroid Disease. Journal of Med. Radiology and Rad. Safety, 2007, v. 52, no. 4, pp. 53-61 (in Russian).
12. Dolya O.P., Matusevich E.S., Klyopov A.N., Kurachenko Yu.A. Monte Carlo simulation of gamma camera collimator sensitivity function to gamma radiation of osteotropic radiopharmaceutical. Medicinskaya fizika, 2008, no. 2, pp. 63-75 (in Russian).
13. Clairand I., Ricard M., Gouriou J., Di Paola M., Aubert B. DOSE3D: EGS4 Monte Carlo codebased software for internal radionuclide dosimetry. J. Nucl. Med., 1999, v. 40, no. 9, pp. 1517–1523.
14. Wilderman S.J., Dewaraja Y.K. Method for fast CT/SPECTbased 3D Monte Carlo absorbed dose computations in internal emitter therapy. IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2007, v. 54, no. 1, pp. 146-151.
15. Dewaraja Y.K., Ljungberg M., Koral K. Monte Carlo evaluation of object shape effects in I131 SPECT tumor activity quantication. Eur. J. Nucl. Med., 2001, no. 28, pp. 900-906.
16. Kost S.D., Dewaraja Y.K., Abramson R.G., Stabin M.G. A voxelbased dosimetry method for targeted radionuclide therapy using Geant4. Cancer Biotherapy and Radiopharmaceuticals, 2015, v. 30, no. 1, pp. 1-11.
17. Song N., He B., Wahl R.L., Frey E.C. EQPlanar: a maximumlikelihood method for accurate organ activity estimation from whole body planar projections. Phys. Med. Biol., 2011, v. 56, no. 17, pp. 5503-5524.
18. Sgouros G., Frey E., Wahl R., He B., Prideaux A., Hobbs R. Threedimensional imagingbased radiobiological dosimetry. Semin. Nucl. Med., 2008, v. 38, pp. 321-334.
19. Dewaraja Y., Wilderman S.J., Ljungberg M., Koral K.F., Zasadny K.R., Kaminiski M. Accurate dosimetry in 131I radionuclide therapy using patientspecic, 3dimensional methods for SPECT reconstruction and absorbed dose calculation. J. Nucl. Med., 2005, v. 46, pp. 840–849.
20. Briesmeister J. F. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo NParticle Transport Code, Version 4C. LA 13709M, 2000, 823 p.