+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="/pdf/2017/02/2017-02-article-02.pdf"
first_page="15"
last_page="25"
udc="519.7:519.23/.24/.25"
title="Statistical data analysis of NPP equipment failures in non homogeneous event flow. Part 2"
original_title="Статистический анализ данных об отказах оборудования атомных станций в условиях неоднородного потока событий. Часть 2"
authors=["AntonovAV", "ChepurkoVA"]
tags=["failure flow", "intensity function", "non-homogeneous event flow", "normalizing flow function model (NFF)", "abstract homogeneous flow", "counting process", "aging system", "juvenescent system", "renewal equation"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.02"

+++

In the process of its operation, the technical equipment passes through three stages, each of which is characterized by a certain trend in the failure flow parameter (FFP) behavior. During normal operation, the FFP value is approximately constant. In this case, the equipment operation is assumed to be homogeneous and the reliability indices are calculated by classical methods. At the burn-in stage, the FFP decreases with time; at the aging stage, it increases. Therefore, at these stages, the operating times between two successive failures are not identically distributed random values, and the failure flow cannot be considered as recurrent. In calculating the reliability characteristics, it is necessary to take into account the failure flow non-homogeneity in time. The paper describes a method for estimating the NPP equipment reliability indices, which takes into account the possible failure flow non-homogeneity. The specificity of incoming statistical data on failures is noted. A description is given of the normalizing flow function model used for calculating the required reliability indices. As a practical example, data on the Bilibino NPP CPS KNK-56 component failures have been analyzed. The article continues to present the statistical data analysis methods introduced by the authors in their previous work [1].

### References

1. Antonov A.,ChepurkoV. Statistical analysis of the nuclear power plant equipment failure data in non-homogeneous failure flow. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 3, pp. 20-29 (in Russian).
2. Bayhelt F., Franken P. The Reliability and Maintenance. Mathematical approach: first with it. Moscow. Radio i Svyaz’ Publ, 1988. 392 p. (in Russian).
3. Antonov A.V., Nikulin M.S., Nikulin A.M., Chepurko V.A. Theory of Reliability. Statistical Models. Moscow. SIC INFRA-M Publ., 2015. 576 p. (in Russian).
4. GOST 27.002-89 Industrial product dependability. General concepts Terms and Definitions (in Russian).
5. Daley D.J., Vere-Jones D. An introduction to the theory of point processes: Vol. 1: Elementary theory and methods. Verlag New York – Berlin – Heidelberg: Springer, 2003. 469 p.
6. Chepurko V.A. Chepurko S.V. Models of nonhomogeneous flows in the renewal theory. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2012, 164 p. (in Russian).
7. Volnikov I., Chepurko V. Heterogeneous flow failures and restorations. Diagnostics and forecasting of complex information objects of intellectual systems. Coll. Sci. Works № 14 ACS Dep. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2002, pp. 36-44 (in Russian).
8. Nikitina A., ChepurkoV. On account of the failure flow heterogeneity. Diagnostics and forecasting of complex information objects of intellectual systems. Coll. Sci. Works № 15 ACS Dep. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2004, pp. 31-36 (in Russian).
9. Skiba M. On average, resource and time remaining inhomogeneous flow of failures. Diagnostics and forecasting of complex information objects of intellectual systems. Coll. Sci. Works № 18 ACS Dep. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2009, pp. 41-56 (in Russian).
10. Chepurko V. Reliability characteristics of systems in view of the failure flow heterogeneity. Diagnostics and forecasting of complex information objects of intellectual systems. Coll. Sci. Works № 17 ACS Dep. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2007, pp. 29-40 (in Russian).
11. Ivanova K., ChepurkoV. A mathematical model of the joint event flow. Diagnostics and forecasting of complex information objects of intellectual systems. Coll. Sci. Works № 18 ACS Dep. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2009, pp. 64-79 (in Russian).
12. Antonov A., Belova K., Chepurko V. On one method of reliability coefficients calculation for objects in non-homogeneous event flows. Mathematical and Statistical Models and Methods in Reliability. Applications to Medicine, Finance, and Quality Control. Ed. by V.V. Rykov, N. Balakrishnan, M.S. Nikulin. Statistics for Industry and Technology. Springer, 2010, pp. 51-67.
13. Antonov A.V., Chepurko V.A. The account of ageing effect in operation of the equipment at the stage of nuclear power plant reliability and safety analysis. / Second International Conference on Accelerated life testing in reliability and Quality control «ALT 2008» (University V. Segalen. Bordeaux 2, France), pp. 35-39.
14. Ivanova K., Skiba M., ChepurkoV. Method for assessing the reliability of nuclear power plant systems performance in a nonuniform flow of failures. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2009, no. 4, pp. 29-38 (in Russian).
15. Antonov A., Ivanova K., Chepurko V. Statistical analysis of the failures of nuclear power equipments, taking into account the failure rate heterogeneity. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2011, no. 2, pp. 75-87 (in Russian).
16. Antonov A.V., Chepurko V.A. Estimation of the reliability of the aging systems like the example of the nuclear power industry systems. Nadezhnost’. 2010, v. 33, no. 1, pp.18-29 (in Russian).
17. Sahakyan S., Ostreykovsky V., Chepurko V. The method of processing of statistical data on the reliability of the equipment during the operation of nuclear power plants. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2007, no. 3, iss. 1, pp. 30-37 (in Russian).
18. Antonov A., Salnikov N., Khromova M., Chepurko V. An estimate reliability indices recovered technical systems. Informatsionnye tekhnologii. 2013, no. 12, pp. 56-61 (in Russian).
19. Antonov A., Salnikov N., Khromova M., Chepurko V. The justification of the nuclear parameter estimation flow of failures of technical systems recovered. Informatsionnye tekhnologii. 2014, no. 12, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
20. Moiseev I.F., Antonov A.V. Probabilistic analysis of the residual resource of reliability indicators subsystems equipment CPS Bilibino on the basis of information about failures from 1974 to 2014. Technical Report. Moscow. VNIIAES Publ., 2015. 164 p. (in Russian).