+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/02/03.pdf"
first_page="26"
last_page="37"
udc="62.192:682.039"
title="Development of estimation of parameters of risk"
original_title="Развитие подходов к оцениванию параметров риска"
authors=["EliseyevaMA", "MalovikKH"]
tags=["risk degree", "sensitivity of risk", "residual risk", "index of indeterminacy", "management of risk", "larger data"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.03"

+++

The production safety at projection and operation of the hazardous production facilities (HPF) is provided, in many respects, due to identification, the analysis and prediction of risk of accidents (refusals) which are carried out by means of, whenever possible, more the overall quantitative assessment of risk, when determining technical condition of HPF [1] that is carried out by Federal Service for Environmental, Technological and Nuclear Supervision of Russia (Rostekhnadzor). Among HPF with multifactorial risks at a design stage the special place belongs to objects of a nuclear power engineering, technical means for development of the shelf, to platforms for oil and gas production, and to also crucial infrastructure facilities as assets which are absolutely necessary for normal functioning of society and economy of our state in the conditions of unexpected influence of factors of catastrophic risk [2 – 4].

Problematic issues of estimation and prediction of indexes of danger of risks of adverse and emergency situations, accidents and refusals are considered in [2, 3, 5 – 8] where safety of HPF on the stipulated interval of time is defined by two major factors: probability of emergence of an adverse event (situation) and damage from this event, by means of various methods of determination of risks, including the modern achievements of asymptotic probability theory of extreme values.

For solution of problem tasks of estimation of risk questions of a parameter estimation of risk at various options of interpretation of the graphic state space of HPF are considered in this work. Features of estimation of sensitivity of risk and degree of risk and evolution of approaches for estimation of risk at projection and operation of HPF are shown. Techniques of the analysis of Big Data for management of risk are offered.

### References

1. Law on the production safety of hazardous production facilities of 21.07.1997 No. 116-FZ (in Russian).
2. Zgurovskiy M.Z., Pankratova N.D. Systems analysis. Problems, methodology, applications. Kiev. Naukova dumka Publ., 2011. 726 p. (in Russian).
3. Ostreykovskiy V.A. Operation of nuclear power plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1999. 928 p. (in Russian).
4. Lapa M.V., Malovik K.N. Development of scientific bases of upgrading of operation and resursosposobnost of crucial infrastructure facilities. Kharkov. Industriya publ., 2016. 280 p. (in Russian).
5. Mahutov N.A., Frolov K.V., Dragunov Yu.G. Analysis of risk and increase in safety of water-to-water power reactors. Moscow. Science Publ, 2009. 499 p. (in Russian).
6. Akimov V.A., Byikov A.A., Schetinin E.Yu. Introduction to statistics of extreme values and its applications.MChS Rossii. Moscow. FGU VNII GOChS (FTs) Publ., 2009. 524 p. (in Russian).
7. Begun В.В., Gorbunov O.V., Kadenko I.N. Probabilistic analysis of the safety of nuclear power plants (PSA). Kiev, Naukova Dumka Publ., 2000. 568 p. (in Russian).
8. Antonov A.V.Systems analysis. Moscow. Vysshaya Shkola Publ., 2006. 454 p. (in Russian).
9. ISO/IEC of 31010:2009 Risk managementet – Risk assessment techniques
10. Malovik K.N. Development of scientific bases of upgrading of estimation and prediction of resource characteristics of the composite objects. Sevastopol. SNUYaP Publ., 2013. 332 p. (in Russian).
11. Ostreykovskiy V.A.Mathematical model operation of technogenic risk from operation of an oil and gas inventory. Vestnik kibernetiki. 2012, no. 11, pp. 71-75 (in Russian).
12. Malovik K.N., Eliseeva M.A. Assessment of technical risk when monitoring and steady operation of the composite objects. «Sustainable development». Technologies of environmental protection. Varna – August, 2014. Bulgaria, Varna. International association «Sustainable development» (MAUR) Publ., 2014, no. 20, pp. 125-130.
13. Eliseeva M.A., Malovik K.N., Miroshnichenko A.N. Management of a resursosposobnost of an inventory of mining. Gornyj informatsionno+analiticheskij byulleten’. 2015, v. 8, pp. 315-322 (in Russian).
14. GOST R ISO/MEK 31010 -2011. Management of risk. Methods of assessment of risk.
15. Eliseeva M., Malovik C. Sensitivity Assessment in Risk Management. Scientific Israel – Technological Advantages. 2015, v. 17, no. 3-4, pp. 142-148.
16. Eliseeva M.A., Malovik K.N. Perfecting of estimation of risk. Kachestvo i zhizn’. 2016, no. 1, pp. 74-76 (in Russian).
17. Eliseeva M.A., Malovik K.N., Malovik S.K. Perfecting of the regulatory base on operation of products VVT. Scientific works of MOO «Academy of Problems of Quality». Russian Federation. Kachestvo i zhizn’. Special issue. 2016, pp. 105-111 (in Russian).
18. Mayer-Shenberger Victor, Kukyer Kenneth. Big Data. Revolution which will change how we live we work and we think. Moscow. Mann, Ivanov and Ferber Publ., 2014. 240 p. (in Russian).