+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="05"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/02/05.pdf"
first_page="51"
last_page="60"
udc="621.039.51"
title="BFS: past, present and future"
original_title="БФС – прошлое, настоящее, будущее"
authors=["DvukhsherstnovVG", "ZhukovAM", "KlinovDA", "MatveenkoIP", "PshakinGM"]
tags=["critical assembly", "core simulation", "fast neutrons reactors", "nuclear material accounting and control", "physical protection", "reactivity effects", "control rods effectiveness", "power distribution", "sodium void effect reactivity"]
rubric = "historyofscience"
rubric_name = "History of science"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.05"

+++

At present, the BFS complex of fast critical facilities is an outstanding (and unique) experimental facility designed for full scale simulation of different nuclear reactor types. Created in the 1960-s, the complex is still an efficient experimental facility for predicting the main physical parameters of fast neutron reactors with high precision.

These include criticality, CR worth, volume power distribution, sodium void reactivity effect and other special parameters. Special-purpose critical assemblies – benchmarks – mounted at BFS allow revising nuclear data, measurement techniques and calculation methods used for designing fast neutron reactors. The BFS complex has been effectively used in the framework of international collaboration.

During these collaborations were created some experiments: connected with influence of homogenous adding of 237Np in to fuel of fast reactor on efficiency of absorbers and sodium void reactivity effects (France); creation of CEFR core and measuring of neutron parameters (China); creation of benchmarks connected with ex-weapon grade Pu disposal in geological formations and nuclear safety of MOX fuel production (USA); creation of different variants of KALIMER reactor core (Korea), models of BN-600 type reactor (India); influence of sodium cavity on fast reactor core parameters (Japan), creation of modern material control and accounting system (USA).

A significant amount of different nuclear materials accumulated at BFS and used for simulations requires special attention to provide their security. Advanced methods, technologies and equipment are used to ensure effective functioning of the material protection, accounting and control systems. While in operation, the BFS equipment was regularly upgraded and retrofitted and this process is still underway. New tasks emerging due to the development of the closed fuel cycle strategy in Russian nuclear power call for further development and upgrading of the BFS complex and use of new nuclear materials.

### References

1. Kazachkovsky О.D. Fast neutron reactors. Scientific-technical memoirs. Obninsk. IATE Publ., 1995, 135 p. (in Russian).
2. Proceedings of the International Conference Dedicated to the 50th Anniversary of the BFS Facility, 28 Feb – 01 Mar 2012. Obninsk. Scientific and Technical Information Department of SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2012. 287 p. (in Russian).
3. Basic Rules for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials, NP-030-12. Moscow. FBU «NTC YaRB» Publ., 2012. 48 p. (in Russian).
4. Kazansky Yu.A., Dulin V.A., Zinoviev V.P., Belov S.P., Mamontov V.F., Tyutyunnikov P.L. Metodу izycheniya reactornykh kharacteristik na kriticheskikh sborkakh BFS. [Methods for studying reactor characteristics on critical assemblies of the BFS Facility.] Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1977. 88 p. (in Russian).
5. Belov S.P., Gerasimov P.V., Kazansky Yu.A., Marveev V.I., Pshakin G.M., Tyutyunnikov P.L. Raschetno-eksperimentalnoe issledovanie natrievogo pustotnogo effecta reaktivnosti. [Calculation-experimental study of the sodium void effect of reactivity.] Atomnaya energiya, 1979, v.47, pp. 161-164 (in Russian).
6. Kazansky Yu.A., Matveenko I.P., Tyutyunnikov P.L., Shokod’ko A.G. K uchotu prostranstvennykh effectov pri izmerenii reaktivnosti metodom obraschennogo resheniya uravneniya kinetiki. [To the account of spatial effects in the measurement of reactivity by the inverse solution method of the kinetics equation.] Atomnaya energiya, 1981, v.51, p. 387-389 (in Russian).
7. Kazansky Yu.A., Dulin V.A., Sidirov G.I., Mamontov V.F., Mozhaev V.K. Izuchenie parametrov konversii na bystryh kriticheskih sborkah BFS. [Study of conversion parameters on fast critical assemblies of the BFS facility.] Atomnaya energiya, 1982, v.52, pp. 203-204 (in Russian).
8. Kazansky Yu.A., Van’kov A.A., Vozyakov V.V., Voropaev A.I., Vorotincev M.F., Kuzin E.N., Lityaev B.M., Pivovarov V.A., Shapar’ A.V. Izuchenie spectrov neitronov na sborkah BFS. [The study of neutron spectra on asstmblies of the BFS facility.] Atomnaya energiya. 1982, v. 52, pp. 235-240 (in Russian).
9. Belov S.P., Bobrov S.B., Kazansky Yu.A., Kuzin E.N., Metveev V.I., Novozhilov A.I. Cherniy V.A. Raschetno-eksperimental’niye issledovaniya modeli bystrogo reactora s geterogennoy aktivnoy zonoy. [Calculation and experimental studies of the model of fast reactor with heterogeneous core.] Atomnaya energiya. 1987, v. 62, pp. 354-361 (in Russian).
10. Seleznev E.F., Belov A.A., Mushkaterov A.A., Matveenko I.P., Zhukov A.M., Raskatch K.F. Fast breeder reactor kinetics. A direct problem, PHYSOR-2010, 2010, Pittsburgh, USA.
11. Seleznev E.F., Belov A.A., Mushkaterov A.A., Matveenko I.P., Zhukov A.M., Raskatch K.F., Fast breeder reactor kinetics. An inverse problem, PHYSOR-2010, 2010, Pittsbourgh, USA.
12. Seleznev E.F., Belov A.A., Matveenko I.P., Zhukov A.M., Raskatch K.F. Kinetica reactorov na bystryh neytronah. [Fast breeder reactor kinetics.] Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring, 2012, v. 3, pp. 28-40 (in Russian).
13. Seleznev E.F., Belov A.A., Matveenko I.P., Zhukov A.M., Raskatch K.F. On fast reactor kinetics studies, PHYSOR-2012 – Advances in reactor Physics – Linking Research, Industry, and Education. Knoxville, Tennessee, USA, April 15-20, 2012. On CD-ROM, American Nuclear Society, LaGrange Park, IL.
14. Seleznev E.F., Belov A.A., Panova I.S., Matveenko I.P.,Mikhaylov G.M, Zhukov A.M.Spatial kinetics in fast reactors. International conference on fast reactors and fuel cycles – FR13, 2013, 4–7 of March, Paris, France.
15. Manturov G.N., Kochetkov A.L., Semenov M.Y., BFS-73-1 Assembly: Experimental Model of Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor with Core of Metal Uranium Fuel of 18.5% Enrichment and Depleted Uranium Dioxide Blanket. International Handbook of Evaluated Reactor Physics Benchmark Experiments NEA, 2012.
16. Gauthier J.C., West J.P., Matveenko I.P. Comparison of absorber rod worths in fast reactors. Atomnaya Energiya, 1989, v. 66, iss. 5, pp. 302-308 (in Russian).
17. Matveenko I.P., Dvukhsherstnov V.G., Efimenko V.V. Physical Inventory of Nuclear Materials on BFS Facility. Proceedings of the 2-nd MPC&A Conference. Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2000, pp. 70-77 (in Russian).