+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="06"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/02/06.pdf"
first_page="61"
last_page="70"
udc="620.18"
title="Investigation of the structural condition of Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W steel in irradiated ion-plasma flows"
original_title="Рентгенографическое исследование структурного состояния высоконикелевого сплава Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W, облученного ионно-плазменными потоками"
authors=["MalynkinVG", "PlatonovaEV"]
tags=["ion-plasma treatment", "austenitic stainless steel", "X-ray diffraction-pattern", "stacking faults", "slip deformation", "twinning deformation"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.06"

+++

It was found that under the influence of ion-plasma treatment radiation-induced structural-hase transformations in the high-alloy superalloy Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W differ from the transformations in steels of the type 0X18H10T and 0X16N15M3B, widely used in nuclear power engineering. These differences were established with the help of X-ray analysis, which showed that additional reflections on the X-ray patterns of irradiated samples of the Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W alloy appear from the side of large angles relative to the reflections of the initial solid solution. At the same time, detailed X-ray diffraction studies carried out by the authors earlier showed that X-ray diffraction patterns of iron-chromium alloys of the type 0X18 (10-30) H, additionally doped Ti, Mo, Nb, Al in an amount of 1–3% and irradiated with ion-plasma The additional peaks appeared from the side of smaller angles.

It is established that in both cases the formed phase is isomorphic to the matrix phase and is thermally metastable, and unlike the 0X18H10T steel, the Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W alloy undergoes softening. The analysis of literature data on the causes capable of causing similar structural-phase transformations in materials subjected to intensive ion-plasma treatment is analyzed. The concentration of package defects in the alloy Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W and the steel 0X18H10T in the deformed state was determined by the X-ray diffraction analysis. It was found that the concentration of packing defects in this state in steel 0X18H10T is 4 times higher, which indicates a lower packing defect energy Steel 0Х18Н10Т. It is concluded that the observed effects are associated with the mechanism of radiation-induced plastic deformation. In the Fe-15Cr-35Ni-11W alloy, structural-phase changes are associated with deformation by twinning, in contrast to 0X18H10T steel, in which the observed transformations are due to slip deformation.

### References

1. Guseva M.I. Ion implantation in metals. Poverkhnost’. Fizika, khimiya, mekhanika. 1982, no. 4, pp. 27-30 (in Russian).
2. Bykov V.N., Malyinkin V.G., Khmelevskaya V.S. The effect of long-range under ion irradiation. VANT. Ser. Fizika radiatsionnykh povrezhdenij i radiatsionnoe materialovedenie. 1989, no. 3, pp. 45-52 (in Russian).
3. Martynenko Yu.V. Effects of long-range action in ion implantation. Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Ser. Puchki zaryazhyonnykh chastits b ndyordoe telo. 1993, v. 7, pp. 82-112 (in Russian).
4. Kuznetsov G.V. Influence of ion bombardment on structural and phase transformations during chemicothermal treatment in glow discharge. MiTOM. 1987, no. 11, p. 21-27 (in Russian).
5. Khmelevskaya V.S., Soloviev, S.P., Malynkin V.G. New structural state in metallic systems induced by irradiation. Itogi nauki i tekhniki. Ser. Puchki zaryazhyonnykh chastits b ndyordoe telo. 1990, v. 2, pp. 151-193 (in Russian).
6. Tetelbaum, D.I., Panteleev V.A., Azov Y.A., Gutkin M. V. On a unified approach to the interpretation of the effect of the long-range irradiation of solids charged particles and photons of light band. Poverkhnost’. Ser. Rentgenovskie, sinkhrotronnye i nejtronnye issledovaniya. 2000, no. 5, pp. 87-89 (in Russian).
7. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Solovyev S.P. Radiation-induced decomposition of unsaturated face centered cubic solid solution. Phase Transitions. 1991, v. 29, pp. 157-166.
8. Khmelevskaya V.S., Soloviev S.P., Malynkin V.G. Noneqnilibrium structures in irradiated metallic alloys. J. Nucl. Mater. 1993, v. 199, pp. 214-220.
9. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G. The Morphology Changes Caused by the Non-Equilibrium Transition in Irradiated Metallic Solid Solutions. Phys. stat. sol. (a) 1996, v. 156, pp. 251-256.
10. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Soloviev S.P., Islam N., Basalaeva K.O. The Effect of long-range in terms of radiation-induced kinetic phase transition. Pis’ma v ZhTF. 1996, v. 22, iss. 5, pp. 9-13 (in Russian).
11. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Soloviev S.P. Structural transition under high dose ion irradiation. J. Nucl. Mater. 1996, v. 233-237, pp. 240-243.
12. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G. Anomalous states in metallic alloys induced by irradiation. Phase Trasactions. 1997, v. 60, pp. 59-65.
13. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Kudrya E.V. Peculiarities of radiation- indutsirovannogo separation in solid solutions with FCC-structure. VANT. Ser. Fizika radiatsionnykh povrezhdenij i radiatsionnoe materialovedenie. 1989, v. 50, no. 3, pp. 58-61 (in Russian).
14. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G. Surface Modification of metallic materials by a method of forming a non-equilibrium States induced exposure to radiation. Problemy mashinostroeniya i nadyozhnosti mashin. 1994, no. 3, pp. 42 – 46 (in Russian).
15. Malynkin V.G., Khmelevskaya V.S., Soloviev, S.P. Structural state of irradiated solid solutions Fe-Ni and Fe-Cr basis. Proc. of IV-th Interindustry conference on reactor material science (Dimitrovgrad, 15-19 may 1995), v. 3, pp. 289-302 (in Russian).
16. Khmelevskaya V.S. Soloviev, S.P., Grabova R.B., Malynkin V.G. Characteristics of radiation induced transformations in chromium steels. FMM. 1990, no. 3, pp. 156-160 (in Russian).
17. Khmelevskaya V.S., Grabova, R.B., Malynkin V.G., Soloviev S.P. Abnormal changes of structure and properties of chromium steels irradiated with ions. Poverkhnost’. Ser. Fizika, khimiya, mekhanika. 1990, no. 8, pp. 126-132 (in Russian).
18. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Kashirin S.I., Kudrya E.V. Morphology of the solid solutions in the field of non-equilibrium phase transition induced by irradiation. Poverkhnost’. Ser. Fizika, khimiya, mekhanika. 1991, no. 2, p. 55-57 (in Russian).
19. Malynkin V.G., Khmelevskaya V.S., Belogolovtsev G.I. Structural-phase transformations in austenitic and ferritic-martensitic steels under ion-plasma exposure. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 1997, no. 3, pp. 74-79 (in Russian).
20. Kunchenko Y.V., Kunchenko V.V., Karamazov G.N. The depth of the zone modification (hardening) materials irradiation at T ≤ 100 °C With low-energy glow discharge plasma. FP of FIP, PSE. 2009, v. 7, no. 1-2, pp. 46-53 (in Russian).
21. Glushko V.I., Bobkov V.V., Ryabchikov D.L., Tsukanov V.V., Sereda N.D. Nucleation and growth of novoobrazovany on the surface of metals in a glow discharge of argon. Izvestiya akademii nauk. Ser. Fizicheskaya. 1994, v. 58, no. 3, pp. 148-142 (in Russian).
22. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Kanunnikov M.J. The transformation of the electronic subsystem of the metal solid solutions in the field of radiation-induced transition. Pis’ma v ZhTF. 1988, v. 24, no. 23, pp. 1-7 (in Russian).
23. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G. Dissipative structures in the metal material after irradiation and other types of strong exposure. Materialovedenie. 1988, no. 2, pp. 25-32 (in Russian).
24. Lindhard J., Scharff M., Shiott H.F. Range concepts and heavy ion-range. Mat. Fys. Dan. Vid. Selsk. 1963, v. 33, no. 14, pp. 1-42.
25. Stepanov V.A., Khmelevskaya V.S. Radiation-induced plastic deformation and «the effect of long-range». Zhurnal tekhnicheskoj fiziki. 2011, v. 81, no. 9, pp. 52-56 (in Russian).
26. Shtremel’ M.A. Strength of Alloys: A Textbook for Institutes of Higher Education, Part 2: Deformation. Moscow. MISiS Publ., 1997, 527 p. (in Russian).
27. Vishnyakov J.D. Defects of packing in the crystal structure. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1970. 216 p. (in Russian).
28. Khmelevskaya V.S., Malynkin V.G., Bykov V.N., Zheltov, Y.V., Ivanov A.N. The effect of the energy defects upakovki on the processes occurring in materials under irradiation. VANT. Ser. Fizika radiatsionnykh povrezhdenij i radiatsionnoe materialovedenie. 1988, v. 43, iss. 1, pp. 25-36 (in Russian).