+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="10"
file="/pdf/2017/02/2017-02-article-10.pdf"
first_page="106"
last_page="117"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Аnalysis of attractiveness of nuclear materials as applied to the on-site fuel cycle of naturally safe fast reactors"
original_title="Анализ привлекательности ядерных материалов применительно к пристанционному топливному циклу быстрого реактора естественной безопасности БР-1200"
authors=["LvovaEM", "ChebeskovAN"]
tags=["BR-1200 fast reactor", "attractiveness of reactor fuel for unauthorized applications", "uranium nitride", "mixed nitride uranium-plutonium fuel", "critical system with neutron reflectors", "beryllium", "tungsten"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.10"

+++

By now, a fairly stable concept of «attractiveness of nuclear materials» has been formed in scientific literature. This term implies that nuclear materials which are in the civil fuel cycle may be used for making primitive nuclear explosive devices or even nuclear weapon. This concept serves as a comparative analysis of various nuclear materials for their possible unauthorized application. Attractiveness of nuclear materials is primarily defined by their nuclear physical properties, i.e., properties inherent in these materials. First of all, these properties include the capability of the considered material to produce a self-sustaining chain reaction. Otherwise, this material will be absolutely unattractive for the above-mentioned purposes. Besides this main property, important characteristics of nuclear materials influencing their attractiveness are the neutron background and heat emission. This paper presents an analysis of fuel compositions in the fuel cycle of naturally safe BR-1200 fast reactors (BREST-1200) with an on-site NFC infrastructure in terms of their attractiveness. The objects of research are the elementary systems in the form of spheres containing nuclear materials of the BR-1200 fast reactor fuel cycle without neutron reflectors and surrounded with such reflectors made from various materials. At the same time, for each system its critical state is defined and the main properties characterizing the attractiveness of nuclear materials are calculated, taking into account materials and thicknesses of the neutron reflectors.

### References

1. Available at: http://www.riatomsk.ru/article/20151020/sooruzhenie-novejshego-reaktora-brest-300-seversk-2016 (in Russian).
2. Avrorin E.N., Chebeskov A.N. Fast Reactors and Nuclear Nonproliferation. Proc. Int. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles «Safe Technologies and Sustainable Scenarios (FR13)», Paris, France, 4-7 March, 2013, pp. 5-6.
3. Chebeskov A.N, Decusar V.M. Evaluation of the Scenario for Innovative Russian Nuclear Power development. Proc. 2007 ANS/ENS Int. Meeting «Making the Renaissance Real», US, Washington DC, 11-15 September, 2007, pp. 8-9.
4. Chebeskov A.N., Butler J, Dyer J., Edmunds T., Jia J., Oussanov V. Advances in Decision Analysis, Cambridge University Press 2007, pp. 489-513.
5. Chebeskov A.N, Whitlock J., Bari R. Status of the Gen-IV Proliferation Resistance and Physical Protection (PRPP) Evaluation Methodology. The IAEA Int. Safeguards Symp., 20-24 Octr, 2014, pp. 28-31.
6. Chebeskov A.N, Kagramanyan V.S. Role of the International Fuel Centers with Fast Reactors in Minimization of ProliferationRisk. Proc. 16th Pacific Basin Nuclear Conf. (16PBNC). Oct 13-18, 2008. Aomori, Japan, pp.7-8.
7. Chebeskov A.N, Kagramanyan V.S. International Nuclear Fuel Centers in Global Nuclear Power Infrastructure. Int. Workshop on Non-Proliferation Embedded at The XI Int. Conf. «Nuclear Safety&Nuclear Education». Obninsk, Russia, Sep 30 – Oct 2, 2009. Obninsk. Central Institute for Continuing Education&Training Publ., 2009, pp.7-8.
8. Chebeskov A.N. New Technological Platform of Nuclear Power. Int. Workshop «Multilateral Concepts of Nuclear Fuel Cycle in Asia Pacific». The University of Tokyo, 26-27 Oct, 2009, pp. 8-12.
9. Chebeskov A.N, Kagramanyan V.S. Role of the International Fuel Centers with Fast Reactors in Minimization of Proliferation Risk. Proc. of Global 2009, Paris, France, Sep 6-11, 2009, p. 8.
10. Chebeskov A.N, Poplavskaya E.V. International nuclear fuel cycle centers in the global infrastructure of nuclear power (Technological aspects of the problem). «Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Challenges and Opportunities (FR09)», Dec 7-11, 2009, Kyoto, Japan, pp. 7-8.
11. Chebeskov A.N., Poplavsky V.M. Status and Tends of Development of Fast Reactor Technology in the Russian Federation. Proc. 7th Tsuruga Int. Energy Forum. Nov 19-20, 2010, Tsuruga, Fukui, Japan, pp. 10-12.
12. General provisions of safety of nuclear power plants –(OPB-88/97) (PNAE G-01-011-97). Basic terms and definitions, p.13. Available at: https://ohranatruda.ru/ot_biblio/normativ/data_normativ/8/8253/ (in Russian).
13. Vaganov A. Strategically important reactor. Nezavisimaya gazeta. 2002,iss. 19 (3103) (in Russian).
14. Sila-Novitsky A. (NIKIET). Fast reactors for large-scale nuclear power. Available at: http://atominfo.ru (in Russian).
15. Kostin V.I.Hard choice. About problems of development of large-scale civil nuclear power and a problem of the choice of reactor technologies for its realization. Available at: http://www.proatom.ru/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=911/ (in Russian).
16. Orlov V.V.Initiative of the President of the Russian Federation and long-term strategy of Ministry of Atomic Energy of Russia. Concerning N. Ponomarev-Stepny’s article in the Nuclear Control journal. Available at: http://archive.li/c0unH (in Russian).
17. Chebeskov A.N., Korobeynikov V.V., Kudryavtsev E.G., Tikhomirov B.B. Quantitative Approach to Evaluate Attractiveness of Nuclear Fuel Cycle Materials. Int. Conf. «Multilateral Technical and Organizational Approaches to the Nuclear Fuel Cycle Aimed at Strengthening the Non-proliferation Regime» Moscow, 13-15 Jul, 2005, pp. 2-3.
18. Carson Mark J. Explosive Properties of Reactor-Grade Plutonium. Science&Global Security. 1993, no. 4, pp. 111-128.
19. Waltar Alan E., Todd Donald R., Tsvetkov Pavel V. Fast Spectrum Reactors. Springer Science
+ Business Media, LLC 2012, pp. 64-66.
20. Glasston S., Edlund М. Osnovy teorii yadernyh reaktorov [Foundations of the theory of nuclear reactors]. Moscow. Inostrannaya Literatura Publ., 1954, pp. 148-155 (in Russian). 