+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/02/13.pdf"
first_page="134"
last_page="144"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental verification of neutron inelastic scattering cross section on iron"
original_title="Экспериментальное тестирование сечения неупругого рассеяния нейтронов на железе"
authors=["ZhuravlevBV", "TitarenkoNN"]
tags=["inelastic neutron scattering", "neutron spectra", "time-of-flight method", "verification of evaluated neutron data"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.13"

+++

The experimental verification of neutron inelastic scattering cross section on iron have been performed on the basis of neutron inelastic spectra measurements at neutron incident energies of 6.0, 7.0 and 8.0 MeV and their calculations in the framework of nuclear reactions statistical theory and direct interaction. Cross sections of neutron reactions present great interest in the context of nuclear technology. Iron is a structural material for different nuclear energy plant and has been proposed as gamma-ray cross-section standard. In spite of a big efforts agreement between the various measurements is poor and various data evaluations reflect this situation. The measurements of the inelastic scattering neutron spectra were performed by the time-of-flight fast-neutron spectrometer on the base of the EGP-10M pulsed tandem accelerator of the Institute for Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE, Obninsk). An analysis of measured data have been performed with use of the Hauser-Feshbach mathematical formalism of the statistical model for equilibrium emission, preequilibrium model and direct mechanism of nuclear reactions. The results of present work agree in the limits of the measurement errors with data of work on the measurement of gamma-ray production cross-sections performed in Los Alamos [7] and with new data obtained at the photo-neutron source nELBE [23]. The obtained results show on need of correct of library of recommended evaluated neutron data BROND-2.2 for inelastic scattering cross section on iron in the direction of their increase and possible small correct of library of recommended evaluated neutron data BROND-3.

### References

1. Thomson D.B. Nuclear level densities and reaction mechanisms from inelastic neutron scattering. Phys. Rev., 1963, v. 129, pp. 1649-1659.
2. Towle J.N., Owens R.O. Absolute level densities from neutron inelastic scattering. Nucl. Phys. A, 1967, v. 100, pp. 257-266.
3. Biryukov N.S., Zhuravlev B.V., Kornilov N.V., Plyaskin V.I., Rudenko A.P., Sal‘nikov O.A., Trykova V.I. Angular and energy distribution of inelastic scattering neutrons at initial energy of 9.1 MeV. Proc. Int. Conf. on Neutron Physics ( Kiev, 9 – 13 June 1975). Moscow. CNIIAtominform Publ., 1976, v. 4, pp. 118-123 (in Russian).
4. Sal’nikov O.A., Lovchikova G.N., Devkin B.V., Trufanov A.M., Kotel‘nikova G.V. Differential neutron inelastic cross sections on nuclei of Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Y, Zr, Nb, W, Bi. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 1971, v. 7, pp. 102-112 (in Russian).
5. Orphan V.J. Gamma-ray production cross-sections for iron from 0.86 to 16.7 MeV. Nuclear Science and Engineering, 1975, v. 57, pp. 309-316.
6. Fujita I. Inelastic scattering of 14 MeV neutrons by medium weight nuclei. J. of Nuclear Science and Technology, 1973, v. 9, pp. 301-309.
7. Nelson R.O., Fotiades N., Devlin M., Becker J.A., Garrett P.E., Younes W. Cross-section standards for neutron–induced gamma–ray production in the MeV energy range. Proc. Int. Conf. on Nuclear Data for Science and Technology, Santa Fe, USA, 26 September – 1 October 2004. AIP Conference Proceedings, 2005, part 1, pp. 838-841.
8. Voss F., Cierjacks S., Kropp L. Cross-section of gamma-ray production for iron. Report KFK-1494, Karlsruhe, 1971.
9. Dickens J.K., Fu C.Y. Cross-section of gamma-ray production on iron in neutron energy range from 0.8 to 20 MeV. Report ORNL-TM-11671, Oak Ridge, 1990.
10. Simakov S.P., Pavlik A., Vonach H., Holavac S. Evaluation of cross-section gamma-ray production for iron. IAEA IAEA Report INDC (CCP)-413, Vienna, 1998.
11. Savin M.V., Livke A.V., Zvenigorodskiy A.G. Evaluation of total gamma-ray production cross sections at inelastic interaction of fast neutrons with nuclei of iron. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 1999, v. 2, pp. 77-90 (in Russian).
12. Drake D.M., Hopkins J.C. Gamma-ray production cross-section on iron. J. Nucl Sci. Eng., 1970, v. 40, pp. 294-303.
13. Lachkar J., Sigand J. Cross-section (n, nўg) for natural iron. Nucl. Sci. Eng., 1974, v. 55, pp. 168-175.
14. Zhuravlev B.V., Kornilov N.V., Baryba V.Ya., Trykova V.I. Neutron inelastic scattering spectra on nuclei of Fe and Nb at initial energies of 6, 7, 8 MeV. Report IPPE EF-1569. Obninsk. 1978 (in Russian).
15. Demenkov V.G., Zhuravlev B.V., Lychagin A.A., Trykova V.I. Spectrometer of fast neutrons by time-of-flight method. Pribory i Tekhnika Experimenta, 1995, v. 3, pp. 43-49 (in Russian).
16. Mannhart W. Evaluation of the 252Cf fission neutron spectrum between 0 and 20 MeV. Report IAEA TECDOC-410, Vienna, 1987.
17. Hauser W., Feshbach H. The Inelastic Scattering of Neutrons. Phys. Rev., 1952, v. 87, pp. 366-377.
18. ENSDF - Library of evaluated data on nuclear structure and decay. Available at: http://www-nds.iaea.or.at/ (accessed 11 Jan 2017).
19. Kalbach C. Preequilibrium exciton model. Z. Phys. A, 1997, v. 283, pp. 40-65.
20. Young P.J., Arthur E.D., Chadwick M.D. Comprehensive nuclear model calculations: theory and use of the GNASH code. Proc. of IAEA Workshop on Nuclear Reaction Data and Nuclear Reactors Physics, Design and Safety, Trieste, Italy, 15 April – 17 May 1996. Ed. Oblozinsky P.Singapore. World Sci. Publ. Ltd., 1998, v. 1, 227 p.
21. Koning A.J., Delaroche J.D. Phenomenological optical model potentials for neutrons and protons. Nucl. Phys. A, 2003, v. 713, pp. 231-239.
22. Avrigeanu V., Hodgson P.I., Avrigeanu M. Global optical potentials for emitted alpha particles. Phys. Rev. C, 1994, v. 49, pp. 2136-2146.
23. Beyer R., Schwengner R., Hannaske R., Junghans A.R., Massarczyk R., Anders M., Bemmerer D., Ferrari A., Hartmann A., Kogler T., Roder M., Schmidt K., Wagner A. Inelastic scattering of fast neutrons from excited states in 56Fe. Nucl. Phys. A, 2014, v. 927, pp. 41-53.
24. Schmidt D., Mannhart W. Elastic and inelastic neutron scattering on elemental iron. Report PTB-N-20, Braunschweig, 1994.
25. Kinney W.E., Perey F.G. Neutron elastic and inelastic scattering cross sections for 56Fe in the energy range 4.19 to 8.56 MeV. Report ORNL-4515, Oak Ridge, 1970.
26. Holmquist B., Wiedling T. Neutron elastic scattering cross sections: experimental data and optical model cross section calculations. Nucl. Phys. A, 1968, v. 38, pp. 403-413.