+++

categories="article"
date="2017-06-21T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="14"
file="/pdf/2017/02/2017-02-article-14.pdf"
first_page="145"
last_page="156"
udc="502.3"
title="Plutonium in the locations of local sources and it’s involvement into global circulation"
original_title="Плутоний в районах расположения локальных источников и его вовлеченность в глобальную циркуляцию"
authors=["BulgakovVG", "GnilomedovVD", "KatkovaMN", "PetrenkoGI", "SorokinaAS", "SynzynysBI"]
tags=["monitoring", "volumetric activity", "plutonium", "surface layer of the atmosphere", "nuclear power plants", "radioactive pollution", "radiochemical enterprise"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.2.14"

+++

The paper seeks to compare volumetric activities of 239+240Pu and 238Pu isotopes in the atmospheric surface layer in the locations of various local sources of radioactive pollution and to characterize them from the ratio of isotopes of 238Pu to 239+240Pu. Based on these data and results of special studies of the activity of these isotopes in the radiation from the remote object areas, to assess the global man-made background of the plutonium isotopes in near-ground atmosphere. Survey targets are the region of a nuclear power plant with Kursk as an example, the territory polluted as a result of the Chernobyl accident, for example Bryansk, the location of the radioactive material reprocessing enterprise PA «Mayak» in Chelyabinsk region, for example Novogorny settlement, and Obninsk as the area of research nuclear reactors. The paper considers the dynamics of volumetric activity in the areas under investigation from 1992 to 2015; the most polluted areas and the areas with the lowest content of plutonium isotopes in the atmospheric surface layer are specified. The reasons of changes in the levels of volumetric activity by years and seasons are established. The ratio of isotopes 238Pu / 239+240Pu is characterized by considering the sources of radioactive contamination, assessed the possibility of using this indicator to identify emission sources. Considered local sources ranked by level of influence on the pollution by isotopes of plutonium.

In the period under review the volumetric activity of plutonium isotopes at all sites did not exceed the admissible volumetric activity in the air inhaled by population from Norms of Radiation Safety (NRB-99/2009) equal to 2,5·10–3 Bq/m3. The considered sources of radioactive pollution have been characterized from the ratio of 238Pu to 239+240Pu isotopes.

### References

1. IAEA. Safe handling and storage of plutonium. Safety Report Series. 2001, no.9, 124 p.
2. Bekman I.N. Plutonium. Part 11. Available at: http://profbeckman.narod.ru/Pluton.htm/ (in Russian).
3. Plutonium fuel an assessment. Report by an Expert Group. OECD, France. 168 p.
4. The radiation situation in Russia and the Neighboring States in 2014. Annual Report. Мoscow. VNIIGMI-MCD Publ., 2015. 322 p. (in Russian).
5. Yablokov A.V., Nesterenko V.B., Nesterenko A.V. Chernobyl: consequences of the catastrophe for people and nature. Saint-Petersburg. Gidrometeoizdat Publ., 2007. 376 p. (in Russian).
6. Miyake Y., Katsuragi Y., Sugimura Y. Deposition of plutonium in Tokyo through the end of
1966. Papers Meteor. Geophys. 1968, v. 19, pp. 267-276.
7. Pan V., Stevenson K.A. Temporal variation analysis of plutonium baseline concentration in surface air from selected sites in the continental US. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 1996, v. 32, pp. 239-257.
8. Thakur P., Khaing H., Salminen-Paatero S. Plutonium in the atmosphere: A global perspective. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2017, v. 175-176, pp. 39-51.
9. USSR nuclear tests: the modern radio-ecological status of landfills. Ed. by prof. V.A. Logachev. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2002. 639 p. (in Russian).
10. Katsumi Hirose, Yasuhito Igarashi, Michio Aoyama, Takashi Miyao. Long-term trends of plutonium fallout observed in Japan. Plutonium in the Environment, Elsevier Science, pp. 251-266.
11. Mietelski Jersey W. Plutonium in the environment of Poland (a review). Plutonium in the Environment, Elsevier Science, pp. 401-412.
12. Ezherinskis Zh., Hou X.L., Druteikiene R., Puzas A., Shapolaite J., Gvozdaite R., Gudelis A., Buivydas Sh., Remeikis V. Distribution and source of 129I, 239,240Pu, 137Cs in the environment of Lithuania. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2016, v. 151 (part 1), pp. 166-173.
13. Lehto J., Salminen S., Jaakkola T., I. Outola, S. Pulli, J. Paatero, M. Tarvainen, S. Ristonmaa, R. Zilliacus, A. Ossintsev, V. Larin. Plutonium in the air in Kurchatov, Kazakhstan. Science of the Total Environment. 2006, v. 366, pp. 206-217.
14. Chamizo E., Garcнa-Leуn M., Enamorado S.M., M.C. Jimйnez-Ramos, L. Wacker. Measurement of plutonium isotopes, 239Pu and 240Pu, in air-filter samples from Seville (2001 – 2002). Atmospheric Environment. 2010. v. 44, iss. 15, pp. 1851-1858.
15. Hirose K., Igarash, Y., Aoyama M., Kim C. K., Kim C. S. and Chang B. W. Recent trends of plutonium fallout observed in Japan: plutonium as a proxy for desertification. J. Environ. Monit. 2003, v. 5, pp. 302-307.
16. Chernobyl: Radioactive contamination of natural environments. Ed. by Y. A. Izrael. Leningrad. Gidrometeoizdat Publ., 1990. 296 p. (in Russian).
17. Tereshchenko N. N., Polikarpov G.G., Lazorenko G. E. Radio-ecological situation in the Black sea in relation to plutonium: the contamination levels of the ecosystem components and the dose rates on biota. Morskyj Ecologichny Zhurnal. 2007, pp. 25-38 (in Russian).
18. Yablokov A.V. The Myth of the insignificance of the Chernobyl catastrophe. Moscow. Centr Ecologicheskoj Politiki Rossii Publ., 2001. 112 p. (in Russian).
19. Makhon’ko K. P. Wind lift radioactive dust from the ground. Obninsk. Roshydromet Publ., 2008. 427 p. (in Russian).
20. Radiation Safety Norms (NRB-99/2009). SanPin 2.6.1.2523–09. – To replace NRB-99: approved by the Ministry of Health of the RF on July 7, 2009. Put into effect as of September 1, 2009. Moscow, 2009, 61 p. (in Russian).