+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/02.pdf"
first_page="18"
last_page="29"
udc="621.01"
title="Сравнение двух основных методов анализа сейсмостойкости оборудования на примере вентиляционного агрегата"
original_title="Comparison of two key analysis methods for the seismic stability of equipment on the example of a ventilation unit"
authors=["SobolevAV", "DanilovPA", "ZevyakinAS", "KurkovSV"]
tags=["seismic stability", "linear spectral method", "dynamic analysis method", "reduced stresses", "accelerogram", "finite element model"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.02"

+++

The paper considers a computational analysis of the NPP’s light equipment seismic resistance on the example of a ventilation unit, using two most common techniques: linear spectral analysis and direct dynamic analysis method.

The basic provisions, assumptions and limitations of the linear spectral method are presented. Examples of computational cases are provided where the method in question is not applicable in a generally accepted formulation. In particular, an analysis of extended spatial structures shall take into account the phase difference and, possibly, the accelerations/displacements for mutually remote boundary conditions. Another example is reservoirs with a liquid which are not filled up. Here, liquid waves can form and they cannot be taken into account in the linear spectral method.

The paper considers the peculiarities involved in the use of the dynamic analysis method, including the required input data, and the approaches to and procedures for synthesizing the calculated accelerograms. A sequence of operations is presented for synthesizing the calculated accelerograms, and materials are listed which describe the mathematical apparatus used in the derivation of finite mathematical relations for the calculation of response spectra and calculated relations as such. The essence of the damping coefficient, its effects on the calculation results and the approaches to its determination are described. Variants with the absolute absence of damping and with absolute damping are discussed.

A real radial ventilation set used in active ventilation systems of nuclear power plants was taken as the test model. The calculation results for the detailed finite-element model of the ventilation unit developed using the Zenit-95 software package are presented. These include the distribution of the calculated reduced stresses obtained by the linear spectral method and by the direct dynamic analysis method. An analysis of the results obtained by the two methods has shown that the linear spectral method overstates the calculated reduced stresses as compared to the dynamic analysis method, that is, underestimates the equipment’s resistance to seismic effects. In addition, the dynamic method shows additional areas of the ventilation unit where significant reduced stresses take place, while the linear spectral method leaves these areas unattended.

### References

1. NP 031-01 The design standards of earthquake8resistant nuclear power plants. Moscow. NTC YaRB Publ., 2001, 50 p. (in Russian).
2. A.V. Petrenko, A.A. Nazarenko, D.V. Filyagin. Analysis of the strength and efficiency of the emergency cooling system of the NPP. Nauchno-tehnicheskaya konferentsiya molodykh spetsialistov OKB «Gidropress» 21-22 March 2012. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/kms2012/documents/kms2012-010.pdf (accessed Aug 23, 2017) (in Russian).
3. Kangarlu K. Calculation of seismic effects of surface steel vertical cylindrical tanks for oil storage in Iran. Diss kand. tekhn. nauk. Moscow, MGSU Publ., 2012, 19 p. (in Russian).
4. Shipitsyn M.O. Calculation of vertical tanks for the action of seismic load using the ANSYS package. Materialy Vserossijskoj nauchno8prakticheskoj konferentsii studentov, aspirantov i molodyh uchyonyh. Tyumen’, 14-16 November 2012, pp. 398-404 (in Russian).
5. Bulushev S.V., Dzhinchvelashvili G.A., Kolesnikov A.V. Nonlinear static method of analysis of seismic resistance of buildings and structures. Sejsmostojkoe stroitel’stvo. Bezopasnost’ sooruzhenij. 2016, no. 5, pp. 39-47 (in Russian).
6. PNAE G-7-002-86 Norms for calculating the strength of equipment and pipelines of nuclear power plants. Moscow, Energoatomizdat, 1989, 525 p. (in Russian).
7. Mkrtychev O.V., Dzhinchvelashvily G.A. Problems of Accounting for Nonlinearities in the Theory of Seismic Stability. Hypotheses and Misconceptions. Moscow. MGSU Publ., 2014, 192 p. (in Russian).
8. Vorob’eva V.K., Zajnulabidova H.R., Freze M.V. Damping in the problems of seismic resistance assessment of buildings and structures. Vestnik Dagestanskogo gosudarstvennogo tehnicheskogo universiteta. Tekhnicheskie nauki. 2016, v. 40, no. 1, pp.108-118 (in Russian).
9. Kut’ko E.S. Sorokin F.D. Calculation of the attached mass and the coefficient of damping of bodies vibrating in liquid by the finite volume method with the application of the VVER-440 fuel rod bundle. Izvestiya vysshikh uchebnykh zavedenij. Mashinostroenie, 2013, no. 8, pp. 47-53 (in Russian).
10. Edwards C.H., Penney D.E. Elementary Differential Equations with Boundary Value Problems, VI-th Ed., Pearson Publ., 2008, 702 p.
11. U.S. EPR Piping Analysis and Pipe Support Design AREVA, 2010, ANP-10264NP, Rev. 1, 98 p.
12. Petrov V.A., Tsejtlin B.V., Skvortsova A.E., Skomorovskaya E.YA., Sudakova V.N., Turchina O.A. Estimated estimation of seismic resistance of the main structures of the Abakan TPP. Izvestiya VNIIG im. B.E. Vedeneeva, 2002, v. 241, pp. 18-27 (in Russian).
13. Miryaha V.A. Numerical simulation of wave and deformation processes in elastic and elastoplastic media by the Galerkin discontinuous method. Diss. kand. fiz.-mat. nauk. Moscow. MFTI Publ., 2015, 150 p. (in Russian).
14. Evaluation of Seismic Designs – A Review of Seismic Design Requirements for Nuclear Power Plant Piping, NUREG-1061. Vol.2, Washington, 1985, 184 p.
15. Saharov A.M. Evdokimenko V.V. Seismic Analysis of Shelving Pools. Sbornik trudov XVII Mezhdunarodnoj Nauchno8tehnicheskoj Konferentsii Molodyh Spetsialistov po Yadernym Energeticheskim Ustanovkam AO OKB «Gidropress» 25-26 March 2015. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/kms-2015/documents/kms2015-043.pdf/ (accessed Aug 23, 2017) (in Russian).
16. SP 14.13330.2014 Construction in seismic regions. Moscow. Minstroj Rossii Publ., 2014, 125 p. (in Russian).
17. Ushakov O.Yu. Method of accounting for the spatial nature of the seismic effect in the calculation of buildings and structures. Diss. kand. tehn. nauk. Moscow. MGSU Publ., 2015, 181 p. (in Russian).
18. Evolution of modal combination methods for seismic response spectrum analysis, BNL-NUREG-66410, Washington, 1999, 11 p.
19. Birbraer A.N. Calculation of Structures for Earthquake Resistance. SPb. Nauka Publ., 1998, 225 p. (in Russian).
20. RB 006-98 Determination of initial seismic ground motions for design basis. Moscow. NTC YaRB Publ., 2000, 76 p. (in Russian).
21. Mkrtychev O.V., Reshetov A.A. A technique for determining the initial characteristics of the most unfavorable accelerograms for linear systems with a finite number of degrees of freedom. Vestnik MGSb, 2015, no. 8, pp. 80-91 (in Russian).
22. Gaskin V.V., Ivanov I.A. Seismic Resistance of Buildings and Transport Structures. Irkutsk. IrGUPS Publ., 2005, 76 p. (in Russian).
23. Korchinskij I.L., Polyakov S.V., Byhovskij V.A., Duzinkevich S.Yu., Pavlyk V.S. Basics of Designing Buildings in Seismic Regions. Moscow. Strojizdat Publ., 1961, 488 p. (in Russian).
24. Drunovtseva S.A. Synthesis of test actions for analysis of seismic resistance of nuclear power facilities. Diss. kand. tehn. nauk. SPb. SPbGU Publ., 2013, 129 p. (in Russian).
25. Kumar Ashok. Software for generation of spectrum compatible time history. XIII-th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Vancouver, Canada, August 1-6, 2004.
26. Durnovtseva S.A. The method of synthesis of seismic oscillations corresponding to a given family of response spectra. Vestnik Sankt8Peterburgskogo universiteta. Ser. 10. Prikl. matem. Inform. Proc. upr. 2013, no. 2, pp. 112-120 (in Russian).
27. Gupta Ajaya K. Response Spectrum Method in Seismic Analysis and Design of Structures. Boston. Blackwell Scientific Publ., 1990. 170 p.
28. Xing J.I.N., Qiang M.A. and Shanyou L.I. Comparison of Four Numerical Methods for Calculating Seismic Dynamic Response of SDOF System. XIII-th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, Vancouver, Canada, August 1-6, 2004. Available at: http://www.iitk.ac.in/nicee/wcee/article/13_2889.pdf (accessed 23.08.2017).
29. The program of calculation of constructions by a finite element method «Zenith-95». Version 6.612.2. User guide. Basic algorithms. Libraries of algorithms. Preparation of initial data. SPb. Nauchno-tehnicheskoe predpriyatie «DIP» Publ., 2015, 271 p. (in Russian).
30. Gaberson H.A. Dynamic Analysis Using Response Spectrum Seismic Loading; Shock Spectrum Calculation from Acceleration Time Histories. California. Civil Engineering Laboratory, 1981, 66 p.