+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/03.pdf"
first_page="30"
last_page="40"
udc="621.1"
title="Seismic safety evaluation during site selection for the nuclear power plants in Bangladesh"
original_title="К вопросу сейсмической опасности при выборе площадки для строительства АЭС в Бангладеш"
authors=["HossainI", "АkbarMSh", "VelkinVI", "ShchekleinSE"]
tags=["seismic hazard parameters", "IAEA", "seismic acceleration and damage", "peak ground acceleration"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.02"

+++

Bangladesh lies in a tectonically active zone. Earlier geological studies show that Bangladesh and its adjoining areas are exposed to a threat of severe earthquakes. Earthquakes may have disastrous consequences for a densely populated country. This dictates the need for a detailed analysis of the situation prior to the construction of nuclear power plants as required by the IAEA safety standards. This study reveals the correlation between seismic acceleration and potential damage. Procedures are presented to study the seismic hazard in the future NPP construction area. It has been shown that the obtained values of the earthquake’s peak ground acceleration are at a level below the design basis earthquake (DBE) level and will not lead to the nuclear power plant malfunctions. For the strongest of the recorded and closely located earthquake centers (Madhupur), the intensity of seismic impacts on the nuclear power plant site does not exceed eight points on the MSK64 scale. The existing predictions as to the possibility of a super earthquake with a magnitude of above nine on the Richter scale to take place in the territory of the country indicate the need to build an additional effective seismic diagnostics system and to transfer nuclear power plants in good time to passive heat removal as stipulated by the WWER 3+ design. A conclusion is made that the account of the predicted seismic impacts in excess of the historically recorded levels should be provided by the establishment of an additional effective seismic diagnostics system and by the timely transfer of nuclear power plants to passive heat removal with reliable isolation of the reactor core and the spent nuclear fuel pools.

### References

1. IRIS, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology. Available at: http://www.iris.edu (accessed May 05, 2018).
2. Michael S.S., Mondal D.R., Akhter S.H., Seeber L., Feng L., Gale J., Emma M.H., Michael H. Locked and loading megathrust linked to active subduction beneath the Indo-Burman Ranges Locked and loading megathrust linked to active subduction beneath the Indo-Burman Ranges. Nature Geoscience, 2006, no. 9, pp. 615-618.
3. Alam M.T., Islam M.R. A Paradigm Shift in Bangladesh Energy Sector towards SDG7: A Few Insights of Energy Statistics in Bangladesh. Incheon, South Korea, 2015, pp. 1-50.
4. Islam A., Chan E.S., Taufiq-Yap Y.H., Mondal M.A.H., Moniruzzaman M., Mridha M. Energy security in Bangladesh perspective – An assessment and implication. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2014, no. 32, pp.154-171.
5. Saakov A.C., Ryasni C.I., Kaznovski P.S., KasyanovK.G., Emelyanova A.D. Comparative analysis of foreign and Russian methodologies for assessing seismic resistance of nuclear power plant equipment. Atomnaya energiya. 2013, v. 115, iss. 6, pp. 309-317 (in Russian).
6. Michio M., Maksud Kamal A.S.M., Dicky M., Reshad M.E.A., Mohammad A.K., Rahman M.Z., Fumio K. Seismic event of the Dauki Fault in XVI century confirmed by trench investigation at Gabrakhari Village, Haluaghat, Mymensingh, Bangladesh. Journal of Asian Earth Sciences, 2011, no. 42, pp. 492-498.
7. Michael S.S., Akhter S.H., Seeber L. Collision of the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta with the Burma Arc: Implications for earthquake hazard. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 2008, v. 273, iss. 3-4, no. 15, pp. 367-378.
8. Anbazhagan P, Smith C.V., Abishek К., Deepu С. Estimation of design basis earthquake using region specific Mmax for the NPP site at Kalpakkam, Tamil nadu, India. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2013, no. 259, pp. 41-64.
9. Estimation of seismic safety of existing nuclear installations. Manual No. NS-G-2.13. IAEA Safety Standards Series. IAEA, Vienna, 2014, pp.1-76 (in Russian).
10. Geotechnical aspects of assessments for NPP sites and foundations. Manual No. NS-G-3.6. IAEA Safety Standards Series. IAEA, Vienna, 2005, pp. 1-58 (in Russian).
11. Assessment of sites for nuclear installations. Manual No. NS-R-3(Rev.1). IAEA Safety Standards Series. IAEA, Vienna, 2016, pp. 1-31 (in Russian).
12. Birbraer A.N. Calculation of structures for seismic resistance. SPb. Nauka Publ., 1998. 255 p. (in Russian).
13. Anan’ev A.N., Kazanovski P.S., Kazanovski S.P., Levedeb V.I., Chechenov K.D. Seismic safety of nuclear power plants. Moscow. MGTU n.a. Bauman Publ., 2011, 234 p. (in Russian).
14. NP-031-01. Norms of designing seismic resistant nuclear power plants. Moscow. Gosatomnadzor Rossii Publ., 2001, 27 p. (in Russian)
15. RB-06-98. Determination of initial seismic vibrations of soil for project bases. Moscow. Gosatomnadzor Rossii Publ., 2000, 76 p. (in Russian).
16. MP 1.5.2.05.999.0025. Calculation and design of earthquake resistant nuclear power. Saint Petersburg. OAO «Kontsern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2011, 140 p. (in Russian).
17. Brylyova V.A., Voiteskaya E.F., Nareyko L.M. The main characteristics of earthquakes. Belorussian Academy of Sciences. Inf. Bull. «OIAE i YaFSosny», Ser.: Atomnaya energetika, 2011, no. 1-2, pp. 1-10 (in Russian).
18. Bari Md.S., Das T. A comparative study on seismic analysis of Bangladesh National Building Code (BNBC) with other Building codes. Journal of the Institution of Engineers (India): Series A, 2014, v. 94, iss. 3, pp. 131-137.
19. Duggal S.K. Earthquake resistant design of structure. Oxford University Press. 2007, 448 p.
20. Hossain I., Akbar M.S., Rahman A. Thesis-Nuclear power plant pre design documentation: seismic and flooding hazard evaluation. Dhaka Univerity Library, 2014, pp.53-77.
21. Makarov V.V., Afanacev A.V., Matvienko I.V., Dolgov A.B. Tests of mock-ups TVS-square and TVS of NPP-2006 with drive of CPS ShEM-3 for seismic actions. 7th MNTK «Safety of NPP with WWER» Podolsk. Russia. 17-20 May 2011. OKB «GIDROPRESS» Publ., 2011, pp. 1-12 (in Russian).
22. Galiev I.I., Chernyaev A.N., Bibik S.V. Development of seismic protection system for design extension conditions. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2017, no. 4, pp. 94-112 (in Russian).