+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/04.pdf"
first_page="41"
last_page="51"
udc="621.039.058"
title="On the necessity and the role of descriptors of neutron activated structural and shielding materials of nuclear installations for future decommissioning"
original_title="Необходимость и роль паспортизации активируемых конструкционных и защитных материалов ядерных установок"
authors=["BylkinBK", "EngovatovIA", "KozhevnikovAN", "SinyushinDK"]
tags=["nuclear facilities", "NPP unit", "decommissioning", "neutron induced activity", "radioactive waste", "radiation shielding concrete", "descriptor"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.04"

+++

Existing situation in nuclear industry is characterized with simultaneous development of the following two processes: design and construction of new generation of nuclear installations and decommissioning of installations of older generations.

Significant amounts of radioactive wastes generated during the decommissioning phase are determined both for the first and the second types of installations by the induced activity of neutron irradiated structural and shielding materials.

Concentration of the so-called radioactivity-hazardous nuclides in primary building and construction materials is the most important characteristics determining the resulting levels of induced activity. Values of these concentrations for the same type of material extracted from different geological deposits may differ by one or two orders of magnitude. Information about concentrations of radiation-hazardous elements in radiation shielding materials is fragmented and, as a rule, unsuitable for practical application.

The purpose of the present study was to substantiate the necessity of compiling and recording the data on the concentrations of radioactivity-hazardous nuclides for building and structural materials for nuclear installations during the phases of design, operation and decommissioning.

Three types of shielding concrete compositions were selected for the investigation. Concentrations of radioactivity-hazardous nuclides were mainly obtained by neutron activation technique. Neutron transport calculations were performed in one-dimensional cylindrical geometry at the core midplane according to usual core-vesselshielding model of modern VVER reactor unit including 2 m thick concrete shield. Both transport and activation calculations were undertaken using modules of SCALE system.

The obtained results allow estimating neutron-induced activation levels in the material as the function of irradiation time, amounts and categories of radioactive waste and their evolution during the decay time from 1 to 1000 years. It was established that neutron-induced activity of shielding concrete strongly depends on the actual concentrations of radioactivity-hazardous nuclides in the concrete including ‘trace’ concentrations (other factors being the same). It was also shown that failure to take such concentrations into account may lead to the underestimation of neutron-induced activation levels and amounts of radioactive wastes and their category.

The obtained results confirmed the necessity of compiling and maintaining data records on the concentrations of radioactivity-hazardous nuclides for materials used in structural and shielding materials of nuclear installations. Proposals were formulated on the potential accumulation of information, composition and formatting of descriptors of chemical composition of shielding and structural materials of nuclear installations.

### References

1. Evans John C., Lepel Elwood A., Sundens Ronald W., Thomas Charles W., Robertson David E. Long-lived activation products in Light-water Reactor Construction Materials: Implication for Decommissioning . Radioactive Waste Management and the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. 1988, v. 11(1), pp. 1-39.
2. Engovatov I.A., Mashkovich V.P., Orlov Y.V., Pologikh B.G., Khlopkin N.S., Tsypin S.G. Radiation Safety Assurance: Decommissioning Nuclear Reactors at Civil and Military Installations. Monographia. Arlington, VA 22201 USA 2005, 208 p.
3. Engovatov I.A., Mashkovich V.P., Orlov Y.V., Pologikh B.G., Khlopkin N.S., Tsypin S.G. Radiation Safety at Decommissioning of Civil and Military Reactor Installations. ISTC Project No.465+97. Under the editorship of Khlopkin N.S. Мoscow. PAIMS Publ., 1999, 300 p.
4. Nazarov V.M., Frontyasyeva M.V., Baboshin N.G., Engovatov I.A., Lavdansky P.A., Stefanov N.I. Activation studies of concrete binding agent ingredients used for nuclear radiation shielding. Kernenergie, 1991, v. 34, pp. 7-8.
5. Bittner A., Jungwirth D., Bernard M., Gerland L., Brambilla G., Fitzpatrick J. Concepts Aimed at Minimizing the Activation and Contamination of Concrete. Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants. Proc. of the European Conference held in Luxembourg, 22-24 May 1984. Springer Netherlands, 1984, pp. 371-388.
6. Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants and Research Reactors. IAEA Safety Standards Ser. № WS-G-2.1. Vienna. IAEA, 1999, 41 pp.
7. Borisov S.E., Kryukov A.P., Mashkovich V.P.,Neretin V.A. Two-dimensional studies of induced activity in MIFI IRT materials during decommissioning and reconstruction Atomnaya energiya. 1996, v. 81, iss. 4, pp. 277-281 (in Russian).
8. Bylkin B., Kozhevnikov A., Engovatov I., Sinyushin D. Induced activity of radiation shielding before NPP decommissioning. Yadernaya i radiatsionnaya bezopasnost’. 2017, no. 3 (85), pp. 1-14 (in Russian).
9. Bylkin B.K., Engovatov I.A. Decommissioning of Reactor Installations. Monography. Moscow. Moscow State University of Civil Engineering Publ., 2014, 228 p. (in Russian).
10. Engovatov I.A., Bylkin B.K., Kozhevnikov A.N. Optimization of the Compositions of Concrete for Radiation Protection of NPP. In Proc. of the IX International Scientific-Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Engineering (ISTC-2014)». Moscow. AO «ENIC» Publ., 2014, рр. 305-309 (in Russian).
11. Voytkevich G.A., Miroshnikov A.E., Povarennyh A.S., Prohorov V.G. Quick reference guide to geochemistry.Moscow. Nedra Publ., 1977, 180 p. (in Russian).
12. Engovatov I.A. Volume of radioactive waste and activation radiation shielding of nuclear installations Vestnik MGSU. 2011, no. 8, pp. 325-330 (in Russian).
13. Bylkin B.K., Kozhevnikov A.N., Engovatov I.A. Selecting Concrete for Radiation Protection for New-Generation NPP. Atomnaya energiya, 2015, v. 118, no. 6, pp.350-354 (in Russian).
14. DOORS 3.2: One- Two- and Three Dimensional Discrete Ordinates Neutron/Photon Transport Code System, ORNL-RSICC C-650, 1998.
15. BUGLE-96: Coupled 47 Neutron, 20 Gamma-Ray Group Cross Section Library Derived from ENDF/B-VI for LWR Shielding and Pressure Vessel Dosimetry Applications, ORNL-RSICC DLC-185, 1999.
16. SCALE: A Modular Code System for Performing Standardized Computer Analyses for Licensing Evaluation. NUREG/CR-200, Rev. 5, 1995.
17. On Criteria of Referring Solid, Liquid and Gaseous Wastes to «Radioactive Wastes» Category; Criteria of Referring Radioactive Wastes to «Special Radioactive Wastes» Category and to «Disposed Radioactive Wastes» Category; and Criteria for Classification of «Disposed Radioactive Wastes». Decree of the RF Government No.1069 of October 19, 2012 («Collected Legislation of the Russian Federation», 29.10.2012, No. 44, Art. 6017; 09.02.2015, No. 6, Art. 974).
18. Bylkin B.K., Davydova G.B., Zhurbenko E.A. Radioactive Wastes at Dismantling of Reactor Installations. Atomnaya energiya, 2011, v. 110, no. 3, pp. 171-172 (in Russian).
19. Bylkin B.K., Kozhevnikov A. N., Engovatov I.A., Sinushin D.K. Radioactivity Category Determination for Radiation-Protection Concrete in Nuclear Facilities Undergoing Decommissioning. Atomnaya energiya, 2016, v. 121, no. 5, pp. 298-301 (in Russian).
20. Engovatov I.A., Sinushin D.K. Minimization of radioactive wastes in decommissioning of new generation nuclear power plants. Vestnik BSTU. 2017, no. 10, pp. 45-51 (in Russian).
21. Ivanov E., Korotkov A., Pyrcov I. Radionuсlide vector.Rosenergoanom, 2015, no. 1, pр. 42-45 (in Russian).
22. Bylkin B.K., Engovatov I.A., Kozhevnikov A.N., Sinushin D.K. Date bank on activation characteristics of radiation shielding concrete of nuclear plants. Vestnik MGSU. 2018, v. 13, no. 2, pp. 213-218 (in Russian).