+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/05.pdf"
first_page="52"
last_page="62"
udc="330.322.5: 338.5, 621.039.5"
title="Effect of delays in NPP construction on investment efficiency"
original_title="Влияние задержек в строительстве АЭС на эффективность инвестиций"
authors=["Solov’yovaAP", "KharitonovVV", "ShmakovOG"]
tags=["nuclear energy", "delays in NPP construction", "investment efficiency criteria", "capital and operating costs", "human factor", "project management"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.05"

+++

An economicmathematical model for analytical calculation of the loss of efficiency of investments in nuclear power plants (NPPs) in case of delayed commissioning of the plant is presented for the first time. Both the conventional approach to investment analysis and new authors’ developments were used. Quantitative estimates of investment efficiency criteria deterioration caused by delays in commissioning of typical NPP unit by up to several years and, consequently, delays in accrual of revenues necessary for paying back bank loans and accumulation of profits, were obtained. The following two limiting scenarios of delays in the construction of the power unit were examined: 1) with constant total capital costs, i.e. with decreasing annual costs, and 2) with increasing total capital costs, i.e. with constant annual costs. It was demonstrated that the increase in duration of construction results in the decrease of the internal rate of return of the project to low values of 4 – 7% per year. With fairly low discount rate (4 – 5% per year), the project becomes unprofitable for construction periods in excess of 10 years (under scenario 2). The losses amount to more than 1 billion dollars of profit (total) for each additional year of construction of the power unit (possible fines and sanctions not included). The payback period doubles for every two years of delay in NPP commissioning and exceeds 30 years already for TC ≥ 9 years. It is important to inform all participants of the NPP construction projects about the critical impact of the length of the NPP construction period on its financial performance and about the significance of efficient project management.

### References

1. Saakov E.S. Engineering during the commissioning of new NPP units. Forum of Nuclear Suppliers ATOMEX-North-West, St. Petersburg, April 19-21, 2011; Commissioning is the final stage of the construction of the nuclear energy objects, which provides the basis for the safety of their further operation. Engineering and technical support for the commissioning of NPP units. ATOMEXPO 2012, Moscow, June 4-6, 2012 (in Russian).
2. Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of October 6, 2006 No 605 «On the Federal Target Program «Development of the Russian Nuclear Power Industry Complex for 2007 – 2010 and for the Perspective up to 2015».(in Russian).
3. Martynova A.A New System for Construction. Atomic expert, 2017, no. 5, pp. 34-37 (in Russian).
4. Auditor Finds Deficiencies in Kudankulam 1 and 2 Project. Available at: http://www.world-nuclear-news.org (accessed December 29, 2017).
5. Chernyakhovskayya Yu., Korolkov D. Rain does not fall on one roof. Atomic expert, 2017, no. 5, pp. 16-24 (in Russian).
6. Berens W. Hawranek, Peter M. Manual for the preparation of industrial feasibility studies. Vienna. UNIDO, 1991. 386 р.
7. Vilenskiy P.L., Livshits V.N., Smolyak S.A. Evaluation of the effectiveness of investment projects. Theory and practice. Moscow. Delo Publ., 2008. 1104 p. (in Russian).
8. INPRO Methodology for Sustainability Assessment of Nuclear Energy Systems: Economics. INPRO Manual. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No. NG-T-4.4. IAEA, Vienna, 2014. 92 p.
9. Kharitonov V.V. Dynamics of nuclear energy development. Economic and mathematical models. Moscow. NRNU «MEPhI» Publ., 2014. 328 p. (in Russian).
10. Kharitonov V.V., Kosterin N.N. Criteria for recoupment of investments in nuclear energy. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 2, pp. 157-168 (in Russian).
11. INPRO Assessment of the Planned Nuclear Energy System of Belarus. IAEA TECDOC SERIES. TECDOC No. 1716. VIENNA, IAEA, 2013. 303 р.
12. The Future of Nuclear Power. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 2003, 180 p.
13. Order of October 13, 2010 No. 486-e (as amended on April 11, 2017) «On approval of the Procedure for determining the price for the capacity of new nuclear and hydropower plants putting into operation (including pumped storage power plants)». Federal Tariff Service. 2017 (in Russian).
14. Cost Estimating Guidelines for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems. GIF/EMWG/2007/004. Revision 4.2. September 26, 2007. 181 p.
15. Nuclear New Build: Insights into Financing and Project Management. Nuclear Energy Agency No. 7195, OECD, 2015. 248 p.