+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/06.pdf"
first_page="63"
last_page="74"
udc="621.039.51:539.17:004.652.4"
title="Infological models of the ENDF format nuclear data"
original_title="Инфологические модели ядерных данных формата ENDF"
authors=["YuferovAG"]
tags=["ENDF libraries", "infologic modeling", "relational format"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.06"

+++

Issues of the infologic modeling of the ENDFformat nuclear data libraries for the purpose of converting ENDF files into a relational database are considered. The transfer to a relational format will make it possible to use standard public software for nuclear data processing, which simplifies the conversion and operation of this information array. Infological models are described using formulas of the «Entity (List of Attributes)» type. The proposed infological formulas are based on the physical nature of data and defining theoretical relations. This eliminates the need for a special notation to be introduced to describe the structure and the content of data, which, in turn, facilitates the use of relational formats in design codes and solution of nuclear data estimation problems. The concept of nuclear informatics has been formulated based on relational DBMS technologies as one of the tools to solve the problem of «big data» in modern science and technology. The organizational and technological grounds for the transfer of ENDF libraries to a relational format are presented. The requirements to the nuclear data presentation formats supported by relational DBMS are listed. Features of the infological model construction, conditioned by the hierarchical nature of nuclear data, are identified. The order for the ENDF metadata preservation is presented, which can be useful for the verification and validation (testing of the structural and syntactical validity and operability) of both source data and the procedures for conversion into a relational format. Formulas of infological models are presented for the crosssections file, the secondary neutron energy distributions file, and the nuclear reaction product energyangular distributions file. A complete array of infological models for ENDF libraries and the generation modules of respective relational tables have been published on a publicly available website.

### References

1. Yuferov A.G. Converting the ROSFOND library to a relational database. IPPE Preprint-3194. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2011. 28 p. (in Russian).
2. Yuferov A.G., Komissarov S.A., Nikolaev M.A. Relational model of the file of angular distributions: IPPE Preprint-3235. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2013. 20 p. (in Russian).
3. Yuferov A.G. Nikolaev M.A., Komissarov S.A. Verification and validation of the file of resonant parameters in the relational format. IPPE Preprint-2828. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2013. 20 p. (in Russian).
4. Varlamov V.V., Ishkhanov B.S. Nuclear databases in scientific research. Available at: http://nuclphys.sinp.msu.ru/bd/index.html (accessed Oct. 13, 2017) (in Russian).
5. Varlamov V.V., Goncharova N.G., Ishkhanov B.S. Physics of nuclei and nuclear data banks. Available at: http://nuclphys.sinp.msu.ru/ndb/index.html (accessed Oct. 13, 2017) (in Russian).
6. Mitropolskiy I.A. The structure of the atomic nucleus. Web lectures. Available at: http://nsp.phys.spbu.ru/images/Kursi_lectsiy/Mitropolskiy/ Structura _atom nogo_yadra/L0.pdf (accessed 13 Oct. 2017) (in Russian).
7. Metadata for information scientific profile. Available at: http://www.elbib.ru/in-dex.phtml?env_page=methodology/metadata/md_review/md_descrip_ scientific.html (accessed Oct. 13, 2017) (in Russian).
8. Gray J., Liu D.T., Nieto-Santisteban M.A., Szalay A., DeWitt D.J., Heber G. Scientific data management in the coming decade, SIGMOD Record. Dec 2005, v. 34, no. 4, pp. 34-41.
9. Bartunov O.S., Velikhov P.E. Scientific challenges to DBMS technology. Superkompyutery, 2011, no. 5, pp. 28-31 (in Russian).
10. Plyaskin V.I., Kosilov R.A. Reference-information interactive systems of nuclear physical data for various applications of nuclear physics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2002. 375 p. (in Russian).
11. Sinitsa V.V., Rineiskiy A.A. GRUCON – A Package of Applied Computer Programs. Rep. INDC(CCCP)-344. IAEA, Vienna, 1993.
12. Sinitsa V.V. REBUS: an interactive data editor for nuclear cross sections in the ENDF format. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2002. 42 p. (in Russian).
13. Blokhin P.A., Mitenkova E.F. Specification of GrayS program for g-source generation. Preprint IBRAE-2012-06. Moscow. NSI RAS Publ., 2012. 28 p. (in Russian).
14. Drake M.K., Ed. Data Formats and Procedures for the ENDF Neutron Cross Section Library. BNL-50274, 1970. Available at: https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc67248/m2/1/high_res_d/metadc67248.pdf (accessed Oct. 13, 2017).
15. ENDF-6 Formats Manual, Data Formats and Procedures for the Evaluated Nuclear Data File ENDF/B-VI and ENDF/B-VII, BNL-90365-2009, edited by M.W. Herman and A. Trkov (June 2009), revised by M.W. Herman, A. Trkov and D.A. Brown (Dec. 2011).
16. Datе C.J. An Introduction to Database Systems (8-th ed.). Pearson/Addison Wesley, 2004. 1024 p.
17. Gray P.M.D. Logic, algebra, and databases. Chichester, West Sussex, England: E. Horwood; New York: Distributor, Halsted Press, 1984. 294 p.
18. Martin J. Computer Database Organization. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1977. 712 p.
19. Maier D. Theory of Relational Databases. Computer Science Press, 1983. 652 p.
20. Knuth D. The Art of Computer Programming. 2: Seminumerical Algorithms (3-rd ed.), Addison-Wesley Professional, 1997. 784 p.