+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/08.pdf"
first_page="88"
last_page="99"
udc="621.039"
title="Vertical steam generators for VVER NPPs"
original_title="Вертикальные парогенераторы для АЭС с ВВЭР"
authors=["EgorovMYu"]
tags=["vertical type steam generator", "horizontal type steam generator", "light water reactor type", "natural circulation", "variable thermocyclic stress", "pre-boiling section", "heat exchanger", "steam-water mixture", "temperature difference", "separators of chevron and swirl-vane type", "containment", "the four-loop layout"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.08"

+++

Steam generators for NPPs are the important large-sized metal consuming equipment of nuclear power installations. Efficiency of steam generator operation determines the overall service life of the whole nuclear facility.

The main aim of the current study is to analyze the advantages and shortcomings of horizontal and vertical types of steam generator design. This analysis is aimed at the definition of recommendations for the development of advanced steam generators for perspective Russian units of NPPs with VVER reactors of increased power.

Design solutions and fifty-year experience of operation of 400 steam generators of horizontal type accepted in Russia and of vertical type applied by Westinghouse, Combustion Engineering, Siemens, Mitsubishi, Doosan were analyzed within the framework of this study. Advantages and drawbacks of both types of devices determining the development of conditions of the operating processes were also identified and systematized.

Currently NPPs equipped with VVER are characterized with extended surface area of containment shells due to the application of four-loop design configuration and horizontal-type steam generators. It was established that steam generator equipment of horizontal type is characterized by such inherent disadvantages of design, technological and operational character as the following: 1) small height and volume of the vapor space above the evaporation surface reducing separation capabilities and power of the equipment as a whole; 2) impossibility of organizing separate single-phase pre-boiling section. As the result, horizontal steam generators with dimensions permissible for railroad transportation and, for VVER-1200 with vessel diameter equal to 5 m by water transport as well, have exhausted the possibilities for further significant increase of the per unit electric power.

The demonstrated advantages of vertical-type steam generators were as follows: 1) absence of stagnant zones in the second circuit, and, consequently, of hold-ups in them; 2) uniformity of heat absorption efficiency of the heating surface ensuring, as well, improved conditions for moisture separation; 3) high degree of moisture removal from steam-water mixture due to the combination of moisture separating elements of chevron and swirl-vane types; 4) increased temperature drop with parameters of generated steam elevated of by 0.3 – 0.4 MPa.

Conclusion was made on the advisability of introduction of steam generators with vertical-type layout in the Russian nuclear power generation. Practical tasks that need to be addressed in order to ensure introduction of vertical steam generators at NPPs with high-power VVER reactors were formulated.

### References

1. Rassohin N.G. Steam generation units nuclear power plants. Мoscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987. 384 p. (in Russian).
2. Fedorov L.F., Titov V.F., Rassohin N.G. The steam generators of nuclear power plants. Saint-Petersburg – Мoscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1992. 288 p. (in Russian).
3. Trunov N.B., Denisov V.V., Kharchenko S.A., Lukasevich B.I. Сonsideration of field experience in developing new projects of steam generators for nuclear power stations equipped with VVER reactors. Thermal Engineering. 2006, v. 53, no. 1, pp. 37-42.
4. Trunov N.B., Ryzhov S.B., Davidenko S.E. Horizontal steam generators: Problems and prospects. Thermal Engineering. 2011, v. 58, no. 3, pp. 179-183.
5. Lukasevich B.I., Trunov N.B., Dragunov Yu.G., Davidenko S.E. The steam generators of WWER reactors for nuclear power plants. Мoscow. Akademkniga Publ., 2004. 391 p. (in Russian).
6. Dmitriev S.M., Zverev D.L., Byh O.A., Panov Yu.K., Sorokin N.M., Farafonov V.A. Main equipment of NPP with freestanding thermal neutron reactors. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 2013. 415 p. (in Russian).
7. Mahutov N.A., Frolov K.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Vasil’chenko G.S., Gadenin M.M., Getman A.F., Gorbatyh V.P., Dranchenko B.N., Zacarinnyj V.V., Karzov G.P., Lukasevich B.I., Makarenko I.V., Makarenko L.V., Mihalev Yu.K., Razumovskij I.A., Salin A.N., Seleznev A.V., Fomin A.V., Sharyj N.V. The bearing capacity of the steam generators of pressurized water reactors. Мoscow. Nauka Publ., 2003. 440 p. (in Russian).
8. Bazhanov V.V., Vavilov A.A., Davydov S.S., Zalevskij P.I., Ivanov V.A. Comparative analysis of dynamic characteristics of NPP with VVER-1000 and steam generators of various types. Energomashinostroenie. 1988, no. 4, pp. 31-33 (in Russian).
9. Sinicyn A.A., Karpov D.F., Pavlov M.V. Theory and practice of heat transfer. Vologda. Vologodskij gosudarstvennyj tehnicheskij universitet Publ., 2013. 71 p. (in Russian).
10. Kirillov P.L., Zhukov A.V., Loginov N.I. Reference book on thermohydraulic calculations in nuclear power industry. Vol. 2: Nuclear reactors, heat exchangers, steam generators. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2013. 685 p. (in Russian).
11. Cvetkov F.F., Grigor’ev B.A. Heat and mass transfer. Moscow. Moscow Energy Institute Publ., 2011. 562 p. (in Russian).
12. Aksenov P.L., Egorov M.Ju. Analysis of methods of intensification of heat transfer in nuclear power plants. Energy system: Collection of reports of the II-nd International scientific-technical conference. Belgorod. Belgorodskij gosudarstvennyj tehnologicheskij universitet Publ., 2017, pp. 251-257 (in Russian).
13. Aksenov P.L., Egorov M.Yu. Intensification of heat transfer in the NPP equipment. Science week SPbSPU: Proc. of the Scient. Conf. with international participation. Institute of energy and transport systems. Part 1. Saint-Petersburg. Sankt-Peterburgskij politehnicheskij universitet Publ., 2016, pp. 82-84 (in Russian).
14. Gortyshov Yu.F., Popov I.A., Olimpiev V.V., Shhelchkov A.V., Kas’kov S.I. Thermohydraulic efficiency of the perspective ways of intensification of heat transfer in channels heat transfer equipment. Intensification of heat transfer. Kazan’. Centr innovacionnyh tehnologij Publ., 2009. 531 p. (in Russian).
15. Aksenov P.L., Egorov M.Yu. Improving the design of the steam generator of a nuclear power plant using the ring Naka9current9turbulence. Energy system: Collection of reports of the II-nd International scientific-technical conference. Belgorod. Belgorodskij gosudarstvennyj tehnologicheskij universitet Publ., 2017, pp. 258-264 (in Russian).
16. Kolev N.I. Multiphase flow dynamics 5: nuclear thermal hydraulics. Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, 2015. 886 p.
17. Trunov N.B., Davidenko S.E., Denisov V.V. Reliability and resource of stills steam generators of NPP with WWER. VANT. Ser: Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES. Reaktornye ustanovki s VVER. 2005, v. 9, pp. 45-54 (in Russian).
18. Sudakov A.V., Silin V.V., Lebedev M.E., Fokin B.S., Danilin B.K., Belen’kij M.Ya. The prospects for the creation of a vertical steam generator with shirm heating surface for modern NPPs with VVER-type reactors. Theory and practice of modern science. Proc. of the VI-th International scientific-practical conference. Moscow, 2012, pp. 137-145 (in Russian).
19. Agafonova N.D., Egorov M.Yu., Sergeev V.V., Gotovskij M.A., Kruglikov P.A., Lebedev M.E., Sudakov A.V., Fedorovich E.D., Fokin B.S. Intensification of heat mass transfer processes in saturated steam generators of NPP with RWR as means of improving efficiency and reliability. Atomnaya Energiya. 2017, v. 123, no. 3, pp. 128-132 (in Russian).
20. Trunov N.B., Lukasevich B.I., Veselov D.O., Dragunov Yu.G. Steam generators – horizontal or vertical (which type should be used in nuclear power plants with VVER?). Atomic Energy. 2008, v. 105, no. 3, pp. 127-135.