+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/10.pdf"
first_page="113"
last_page="124"
udc="621.039.542:621.039.548:621.311.25"
title="Determination of 18-month fuel cycle parameters with goal of fuel costs minimization at the basis of use constructions of fuel assemblies in VVER-1200 reactors"
original_title="Определение параметров 18-месячного топливного цикла с целью минимизации топливных затрат на базе эксплуатируемых конструкций ТВС в реакторах ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["HashlamounTM", "VygovskiySB", "LeskinST", "DumanAS"]
tags=["PROSTOR", "fluence", "VVER-1000", "fuel reloading scheme", "18-month fuel cycle", "effective days", "natural days", "fuel enrichment", "burn-up", "operating costs", "reactor vessel"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.10"

+++

This article presents the results of research, that were focused on determining the optimal parameters of the extension of reactor fuel cycle in order to reduce the total operating costs of nuclear power plants during the transition from 12-month reactor fuel cycle to 18-month fuel cycle.

The relevance of the research is related to the fact that, in recent years, there is a transition at all operating nuclear power plants WWER-1000 (1200) from 12-month reactor fuel cycle to extended 18-month fuel cycle. At the same time, represent the interests to solve the problem of conservation the extension of reactor fuel cycle while reducing the number of loaded fuel assemblies with fresh fuel assemblies which would reduce the total operating and fuel costs. Search for solutions of this problem is associated with mandatory implementation of all requirements for the safe operation of the reactor and the reduction of the maximum fast neutron fluence on the reactor vessel in comparison with its value at the operating nuclear power plants.

In the present work, with using the program PROSTOR software complex researched the neutron-physical characteristics of the core at the nominal parameters of the VVER-1200 reactor through the implementation of various fuel cycle strategies. The article developed various schemes of fuel reloading for an 18-month fuel cycle with a different number of fuel assemblies. The article carries out a comparative analysis of the main parameters in the core for fuel reloading schemes options of an 18- and 12-month fuel cycle with each other. Determine the minimum amount of fuel assemblies and provide the necessary duration of the reactor fuel cycle for 18-month fuel cycle with using the extension of reactor fuel cycle by reducing the power at the end of the reactor cycle to 70% of the nominal power. In the article the arrangements of fuel assemblies were developed to provide field limitations of local power by volume of the core, which reduce the fluence of fast neutrons on the reactor vessel in comparison with the projected value of the fluence. This article shows that the 18-month fuel cycle for the VVER-1200 reactor is more economical than the 12-month fuel cycle. These studies were carried out for the VVER-1200 reactor at the power of 100% of the nominal.

### References

1. Vygovsky S.B., Ryabov N.O., Semenov A.A., Chernov E.V., Bogachek L.N. Physical and structural features of nuclear power plants with VVER. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2013. 304 p. (in Russian).
2. Leskin S.T., Shelegov A.S., Slobodchuk V.I. Physical features and design of the VVER61000 reactor. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2011. 116 p. (in Russian).
3. Malygin V.B. Fuel cycle of power reactors and problems of increasing the resource of fuel elements. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2001. 84 p. (in Russian).
4. Yanovskiy S.E., Yeremenko M.L., Ovdiyenko Yu.N. Development of approaches to sensitivity analysis of the neutron fluence calculation model for VVER reactors on the basis of DOORS code complex. Yadernaya i radiatsionnaya bezopasnost’. 2011, no. 3(51), pp. 38-43 (in Russian).
5. Vygovsky S.B., Ryabov N.O., Chernov E.V. Safety and tasks of engineering support for the operation of NPPs with VVER. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2011. 376 p. (in Russian).
6. Allowance for the fluence of fast neutrons on VVER shells and test specimens for the subsequent prediction of the radiation resource of the hulls (RB-007-99). Vestnik Gosatomnadzora Rossii, 1999, no. 1 (5), pp. 2-14 (in Russian).
7. Method of neutron control on the external surface of the hulls of water-power power reactors of nuclear power plants (RB-018-01), approved on 17.12.2001. Vestnik Gosatomnadzora Rossii, 2001, no. 6 (19), pp. 32-47 (in Russian).
8. Dementiev B.A. Nuclear Power Reactors. Training manual for universities. Moscow. Energiozdat Publ., 1990. 352 p. (in Russian).
9. Molchanov V.L. Nuclear Fuel for NPPs with WWER: Current State and Prospects. Proc. of the VI-th International Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPPs with WWER» May 26-29, 2009. Podolsk. JSC «OKB «Gidropress» Publ., 2009 (in Russian).
10. Hashlamoun T.M., Vygovskiy S.B. Study the possibility of increasing the economy of usage nuclear fuel at NPP with reactor VVER-1000 for 18-month fuel cycle. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2018 (in Russian).
11. Kharitonov V.V. Power Engineering. Technical and Economic Fundamentals. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2007, 256 p. (in Russian).
12. Tomas S. Nuclear Energy: Myth and Reality. Ekonomika Yadernoy Energetiki. 2005, no. 5, p. 47 (in Russian).
13. OECD. The Economics of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ.,1999, 141 p. (in Russian).
14. Semchenkov Yu., Pavlovich A., Chibinyaev A. Proximity to the scenario. Prospects for evolutionary development of VVER fuel. Atomnaya energetika Rossii. 2011, no.10, pp. 25-29 (in Russian).
15. Baturin D.M., Vygovsky S.B.. Accounting for the spectral history of burnup in the preparation of neutron-physical constants of TVS VVER-1000. Atomnaya energiya, 2001, v. 90, no. 4, pp. 256-260 (in Russian).
16. Mastepanov A.M. The Fuel and Energy Complex of Russia at the Turn of the Century: the State of the Problem and the Prospects for Development. Vol. 1. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2009. 477 p.
17. Zhimerin D.G. Problems of the Development of Energy. Moscow. Energia Publ., 1978. 288 p. (in Russian)
18. Vygovskiy S.B., Zimin V.G., Chernov Ye.V., Korikovsky K.P., Krayushkin Yu.A., Mischerin S.A., Osadchy M.A., Semyonov A.A., Strashnykh V.P., Chernov E.V., Chernakov V.A. PROSTOR Software Complex (Ver. 1). The Appendix to the Certification Passport № 182 from October 28, 2004 (in Russian).
19. Anokhin A.Yu., Tsibulsky V.F., Davidenko V.D. The UNK program complex for detailed calculation of the neutron spectrum in nuclear reactors. Moscow. Report of NRC «Kurchatov Institute». Inventory no. 35-410-4/81, May 18, 2001 (in Russian).
20. Rhoades W.A., Childs R.L. The DORT Two-Dimensional Discrete Ordinate Transport Code. Nucl.Sci. & Eng., 1988, v. 99, no. 1, pp. 88-89.