+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/11.pdf"
first_page="125"
last_page="136"
udc="621.039.546"
title="Study of hydrogen generation and radionuclide release during wet damaged oxide spent fuel storage"
original_title="Исследование образования водорода и выхода радионуклидов при хранении разрушенного оксидного ОЯТ во влажной среде"
authors=["GaiazovAZ", "KomarovSV", "LeshchenkoAYu", "RevenkoKE", "SmirnovVP", "ZvirЕА", "IlinPА", "TeplovVG"]
tags=["fire and explosion safety", "damaged SNF", "VVER-440", "radiolysis", "hydrogen", "gaseous fission products", "UO2 dissolution"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.11"

+++

This paper describes the results of the experimental study of hydrogen and gaseous fission products (GFP) accumulation under conditions simulating the interim storage of damaged VVER-440 spent nuclear fuel (SNF) in the leak-tight canisters after successful canister draining but without fuel drying. Physical and chemical processes during wet storage of damaged oxide SNF are discussed. The experiments were carried out in two stages: 1) filling a leak-tight canister containing fuel pellet fragments with water and 2) draining the leak-tight canister and holding wet SNF inside.

The experiments were carried out successively with one and the same canister and differed only in the holding temperatures: 25°C and 80°C.

The data on the release of radionuclides to liquid phase during underwater storage of SNF was obtained from the experiments. Steady-state concentrations of uranium and cesium isotopes were found to be reached when storing SNF under water for more than a month. The kinetics of hydrogen and gaseous fission products accumulation in gas phase during wet spent fuel storage in a leak-tight canister after draining coincide for both experiments. This kinetics demonstrates a sharp decrease of the hydrogen and gaseous fission products accumulation rate after 46 hours of the experiments. The data obtained can be applied in development and verification of modeled processes of damaged SNF behavior during SNF wet storage under radiolysis conditions.

### References

1. Sattonnay G., Ardois C., Corbel C., Lucchini J.F., Barthe M.F., Garrido F., Gosset D. Alpha-radiolysis effects on UO2 alteration in water. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2001, v. 288(1), pp. 11-19.
2. LaVerne J.A., Tandon L. H2 production in the radiolysis of water on CeO2 and ZrO2. Journal of Physical Chemistry B. 2002, v. 106(2), pp. 380-386.
3. Shoesmith D.W. Fuel corrosion processes under waste disposal conditions. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2000, v. 282, pp. 1-31.
4. Barreiro Fidalgo. Experimental studies of radiation-induced dissolution of UO2: The effect of intrinsic solid phase properties and external factors. Doctoral thesis. KTH Royal Institute of Technology. 2017, p. 77 Available at https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1089678/FULLTEXT01.pdf (accessed April 6, 2018).
5. Lucchini J.F., Sattonnay G., Ardois C., Jegou C., Corbel C. Effects of Water Alpha Radiolysis on the Spent Fuel Matrix, International conference Scientific Research on the Back-end of the Fuel Cycle for the 21st Century. Atalante 2000. Available at http://www.iaea.org/inis/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/32/033/32033983.pdf?r=1 (accessed April 6, 2018).
6. Wren J.C., Shoesmith D.W., Sunder S. Corrosion behavior of uranium dioxide in alpha radiolytically decomposed water. Journal of Electrochemical Society. 2005, v. 152, pp. B470-B481.
7. Eriksen T.E., Shoesmith D.W., Jonsson M.. Radiation induced dissolution of UO2 based nuclear fuel - A critical review of predictive modelling approaches. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2012, v. 420, pp. 409-423.
8. Burns P.C., Ewing R.C., Navrotsky A. Nuclear Fuel in a Reactor Accident. Science. 2012, v. 335, pp. 1184-1188. DOI:10.1126/science.1211285.
9. Grambow B., Loida A., Martinex-Esparza A., Diaz-Arocas P., de Pablo J., Paul J.L., Glatz J.P., Lemmens K., Ollila K., Christensen H. Source term for performance assessment of spent fuel as a waste form. Nuclear Science and Technology Series EUR 19140 EN. IAEA, 2000.
10. Kolobashkin V.М., Rubtsov P.M., Ruzhanskii P.А., Sidorenko V.D. Radiation characteristics of irradiated nuclear fuel. Reference book. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1983. (in Russian).
11. Roth Olivia. A Study of Instant Release Fractions and Matrix Dissolution Rate of Two Fuel Samples Irradiated in Olkiluoto. Working Report 2015-19. Posiva Oy. Studsvik Nuclear AB, 2015.
12. Pavlov S.V. Nondestructive ultrasonic methods for testing the research reactor spent fuel. Dimitrovgrad. RIAR Publ., 2013. 256 p. (in Russian).
13. Sukhikh A.V., Sagalov S.S., Pavlov S.V. Fuel of High Power Channeltype Boiling Water Reactors. Problems&Solutions. Dimitrovgrad. DITI NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2017. 184 p. (in Russian).