+++

categories="article"
date="2018-09-20T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2018-03"
issue_name="2018 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/03/14.pdf"
first_page="160"
last_page="170"
udc="621.039.51.17"
title="Verification of the ROSFOND/ABBN nuclear data based on the OECD/NEA benchmark on criticality safety of MOX-fueled systems"
original_title="Верификация константного обеспечения РОСФОНД/БНАБ-РФ в расчетах международного теста OECD/NEA по критической безопасности систем с МОКС-топливом"
authors=["AndrianovaON", "GolovkoYuE", "ManturovGN"]
tags=["MOX fuel", "integral experiments", "BFS critical facility", "accuracy evaluation", "effective multiplication factor", "constant error", "OECD/NEA test", "maximum likelihood method"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.14"

+++

The paper presents the results of a computational analysis of the benchmark OECD/NEA test to assess the accuracy of critical safety parameters of multiplying MOX-fueled systems. The computational test is a set of 15 spherical multiplying systems that differ in composition and geometry characteristics. According to the test conditions, the keff values of the analyzed systems are unknown in advance. As part of the computational analysis of the test, using national codes and nuclear data libraries, along with the calculation of keff, it is also necessary to estimate the a priori (due to the accuracy of the nuclear data used) and a posteriori (taking into account the accumulated experimental information) keff calculation errors. Based on the benchmark test, an updated version of the ROSFOND/ABBN-RF nuclear data was tested. The results of estimating the a priori and a posteriori errors in keff,using the INDEX system for the proposed test models, are presented. The analysis of the calculation data shows that (1) the observed spread in the keff values obtained using the Russian ROSFOND library and foreign evaluated nuclear data libraries (ENDF/B-VII.0, JEFF-3.2, JENDL-4.0) varies from –0.3 up to 0.8%; and (2) the deviation of the calculation results in the keff values, obtained by the ROSFOND library and its group version, ABBN-RF, does not exceed 0.1%. The average a priori uncertainty in keff for all the tested variants of multiplying systems is about 1% and, taking into account the selected set of experimental criticality data for MOX-fueled systems, including experiments at the BFS facilities, the average a posteriori uncertainties in keff can be reduced to 0.3%. The performed evaluations confirm the high accuracy of the ROSFOND/ABBN nuclear data for calculating the critical safety parameters of multiplying MOX-fueled systems

### References

1. OECD/NEA web-site, Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/ (accessed July 05, 2018).
2. Web-page of WPNCS Expert Group on Uncertainty Analysis for Criticality Safety Assessment (UACSA), Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/science/wpncs/UACSA/ (accessed July 05, 2018).
3. Zabrodskaya S.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Koshcheev V.N., Manochin V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Pronyaev V.G. RUSFOND – Russian national library of evaluated neutron data. VANT. Ser.: Yadernye Constanty. 2007, no. 12. pp. 3-21 (in Russian).
4. Andrianova O. N., Golovko Yu. E, Rozhihin E. V., Yakunin A. A. Verifikatsiya biblioteki konstant BNAB-RF na modelnyh zadachah i spetsialno otobrannyh benchmark-eksperimentah. Yadernaya phizika i inzhiniring. 2012, v. 3, no. 2, pp. 120-126 (in Russian).
5. Manturov G. Codes and nuclear data for reactor neutronics calculations and uncertainty estimation. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno/Reactornye Constanty. 2017, no. 1, pp. 115-128 (in Russian).
6. Manturov G., Koscheev V., Nikolaev M., Peregudov A., Semenov M., Tsiboulia T. System of codes and nuclear data for neutronics calculations of fast reactors and uncertainty estimation. Proc. of International Conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17). Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation, June 26-29, 2017. Conference ID 50810 (IAEA-CN245-475).
7. Andrianova O., Golovko Yu., Jerdev G., Zadornov D., Koscheev V., Manturov G., Peregudov A., Tsibulva A. Testing covariance matrices of uncertainties in the BNAB data system. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 109-117 (in Russian).
8. Usachev L., Bobkov Y. Planning on optimum set of microscopic experiments and evaluations to obtain a given accuracy in reactor parameter calculations, INDC CCP-19U, IAEA Int. Nucl. Data Committee, 1972.
9. Golovko Yu.E., Koshheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Tsibulja A.M. Primenenie metoda naimen’shih kvadratov dlja ocenki konstantnoj pogreshnosti raschetov kritichnosti sistem s plutonium. Yadernaya phizika i inzhiniring. 2014, v. 5, no. 4, p. 293 (in Russian).
10. Ivanova T., Laville C., Dyrda J., Mennerdahl D., Golovko Y. OECD/NEA expert group on uncertainty analysis for criticality safety assessment: results of benchmark on sensitivity calculation (phase III). International Conference on the Physics of Reactors 2012, PHYSOR 2012: Advances in Reactor Physics 2012, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA, pp. 2762-2780.
11. Golovko Yu. Application of the undetermined lagrangian coefficients method in the analysis on consistency of experiments on the example of systems with high enriched uranium from ICSBEP handbook. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 5-15 (in Russian).
12. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code, Version 5, Volume I: Overview and Theory, LA-UR-03-1987, Los Alamos, US, 2008. – 416 P.
13. International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments (ICSBEP), Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/science/wpncs/icsbep/handbook.html (accessed July 05, 2018).
14. Golovko Yu., Manturov G. Application of the undetermined lagrangian coefficients method for eliminate contradictions in the analysis of ICSBEP benchmark experiments on criticality safety. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno/Reactornye Constanty. 2017, no. 2. pp. 52-60 (in Russian).
15. Golovko Yu., Rozhikhin Y., Tsibulya A., Koscheev V. Evaluation of accuracy of calculational prediction of criticality based on ICSBEP handbook experiments. Int. Conf. on the Physics of Reactors 2008. – PHYSOR 2008, Interlaken, Switzerland, pp. 1677-1684.
16. Andrianova O., Koscheev V., Lomakov G., Manturov G. Combined use of differential and integral experiments for adjustment of evaluated nuclear data. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno/Reactornye Constanty. 2017, no. 1, pp. 98-105 (in Russian).
17. Andrianova O., Manturov G., Rozhikhin Y. Application of MCNP nonanalog techniques for calculations of reaction rate measurements at the BFS facilities. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 66-76 (in Russian).
18. Doulin V., Kochetkov A., Pavlova O., Rozhikhin Y., Semenov M. BFS1 FUND EXP 003. Experimental program performed at the BFS-42 assembly k-infinity experiments for 238U in fast neutron spectra: measurements with plutonium mixed with depleted uranium dioxide and polyethylene. International handbook of evaluated reactor physics benchmark experiments. CD version, NEA/NSC/DOC (2007) 1, 2007.
19. Doulin V., Kochetkov A., Pavlova O., Rozhikhin Y., Semenov M. BFS2 FUND EXP 001. Experimental program performed at the BFS-31 assembly k-infinity experiments for 238U in fast neutron spectra: measurements with plutonium mixed with depleted uranium dioxide and polyethylene. International handbook of evaluated reactor physics benchmark experiments. CD version, NEA/NSC/DOC (2007) 1, 2007.
20. Doulin V., Kochetkov A., Pavlova O., Rozhikhin Y., Semenov M. BFS2 FUND EXP 001. BFS-97, -99,-101 assemblies: experimental program on critical assemblies with heterogeneous compositions of plutonium, depleted uranium dioxide, and polyethylene. The International handbook of evaluated reactor physics benchmark experiments. CD version, NEA/NSC/DOC (2007) 1, 2007.