+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/02.pdf"
first_page="15"
last_page="25"
udc="621.039.556"
title="Prospects of using the experimental experimental channels of IRT-T reactor in neutron capture therapy"
original_title="Перспективы использования экспементальных каналов реактора ИРТ-Т для нейрозахватной терапии"
authors=["AnikinMN", "LebedevII", "NajmushinAG"]
tags=["neutron capture therapy", "NCT", "radiation treatment", "research reactor", "IRT-T", "beam ports"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.02"

+++

Results of the neutronics calculation of the IRT-T reactor core for the purpose of selecting one of the horizontal experimental channels to serve as the basis for the installation for conducting activities in the field of neutron capture therapy (NCT) of socially significant diseases are presented in the present paper. Full-scale computational model was developed within the MCU-PTR software tool incorporating the detailed description of fuel assemblies, beryllium reflector blocks, shim rods of the control and protection system, as well as all experimental channels of the reactor. Detailed energy spectra of neutrons and photons in each horizontal channel of the reactor were obtained as the result of the performed calculation. Since minimization of the contribution of the dose generated by fast neutrons and photons in the total dose represents an important characteristic for the NCT, detailed dosimetry loads were determined within the area intended for irradiation of samples. KERMA-factors for neutrons and photons were used in the determination of dosimetry parameters of the beam taking into account the energy distribution. It was demonstrated that the absolute values of the neutron flux density are higher in the radial experimental channels of the reactor, but, however, smaller contribution of fast neutrons and photons in the tangential horizontal channel allows formulating the conclusion that tangential channel is preferable for developing NCT installation. Possible approaches for modernization of HEC-1 channel for creating appropriate conditions for irradiation of cellular structures and small biological objects were identified. The expected result of the modernization will allow performing research of efficiency and toxicity of new drugs for the delivery of boron and other elements with high absorption cross-sections.

### References

1. Absalyamov R.I.  Modern Methods of Radiation Treatment of Tumors of the Head and Neck (Review). Opuholi  Golovy i Shei. 2013, no. 3, pp. 27-34 (in Russian). 
2. Locher G.L. Biological effects and the therapeutic possibilities of neutrons. Amer. J. Roentgenol. 1936, v. 36, pp. 1-13. 
3. Shejno I.N., Izhevskij P.V., Lipengol’c A.A., Kulakov V.N., Vagner A.R., Sukhih E.S., Varlachev V.A. Development of binary technologies for radiotherapy of cancer: state and problems. Bjulleten’ sibirskoj mediciny. 2017, no. 16 (3), pp. 192-209. DOI: https://doi.org/10.20538/ 1682-0363-2017-3-192-209 (in Russian). 
4. Kuplennikov Ye.L., Dovbnya  A.N., Telegin Yu.N., Cymbal V.A.,  Kandybej S.S.  Neutron Beams for Therapy: An Overview. Har’kov. NNTs HFTI Publ., 2011, 31 p. (in Russian). 
5. Sauerwein W.A.G., Moss R.L. Requirement for Boron Neutron Capture Therapy (BNCT) at a Nuclear  Research  Reactor. The European BNCT Project. Belanda, 2009,  130 p. 
6. Skrk J., Stecher-Rasmussen F., Tinti R., Uakkas A., Vana N., Wambersie A., Wemple C., Wheeler F., Yamamoto T., Zamenhof R. Current Status of Neutron Capture Therapy. Report of International Atomic Energy Agency No. 1223. Vienna, 2001, 289 p. 
7. Liu Y. W., Huang T. T., Jiang S. H.,  Liu H. M. Renovation of Epithermal  Neutron Beam for BNCT at THOR. Applied radiation and isotopes, 2004,  v. 61(5), pp. 1039-1043.  DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.apradiso.2004.05.042 
8. Esposito J., Rosi G., Agosteo S. The New Hybrid Thermal Neutron Facility at TAPIRO Reactor for BNCT Radiobiological Experiments. Radiation Protection Dosimetry. 2007,  v. 126, no. 1-4, pp. 69-73.  DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/rpd/ncm015 
9. Rogus R., Harling O., Yanch J. Mixed Field dosimetry of Epithermal Neutron Beams for Boron Neutron Capture Therapy at the MITR-II Research Reactor. Med. Phys. 1994, v. 21(10), pp. 1611-1625.   DOI: https://doi.org/10.1118/1.597267 
10. Hawthorne M.F., Shelly K., Wiersema R.J. (ed.). Frontiers in Neutron Capture Therapy. Springer, 2013. 1467 p. 
11. Shchurovskaya M.V., Alferov V.P., Geraskin N.I., Radaev A.I., Naymushin A.G., Chertkov Y.B., Anikin M.N. & Lebedev I.I. Control rod calibration simulation using Monte Carlo code for the IRT-type research reactor. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2016, v. 96, pp. 332-343. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2016.06.015 
12. Alekseev N.I., Gomin E.A., Marin S.V., Nasonov V.A., Shkarovskii D.A. and Yudkevich  M.S. MCU-PTR program for high-precision calculations of pool and tank type research reactors. Atomic Energy, 2011,  v. 109, no. 3, pp. 149-158. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-011-9337-0
13. Shchurovskaya M.V., Alferov V.P., Geraskin N.I., Radaev A.I., Naymushin A.G., Chertkov Y.B., Anikin M.N. & Lebedev I.I. Validation of the MCU-PTR Computational Model of Beryllium Poisoning Using Selected Experiments at the IRT-T Research Reactor.  Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2018, v. 113,  pp. 436-445. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2017.11.046 
14. Naymushin A., Chertkov Y., Shchurovskaya M., Anikin M. & Lebedev I. Modeling of Operating History of the Research Nuclear Reactor. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering.  2016,  v. 135. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/135/1/012032 
15. Naymushin A., Anikin M., Lebedev I., Busygin A., Dmitriev S. & Zolotykh D. Features of Fuel Burnup Calculations for IRT-T Reactor Using MCU-PTRCcode. Journal of Industrial Pollution Control.  2016,  v. 32,  no. 2,  pp. 449-452. 
16. Varlachyov V.A. Neutron Transmutation Doping of Silicon in Pool#Type Research Reactor. Dr. Sci. (Engineering) Diss.  Tomsk. TPU Publ., 2015.  326 p. (in Russian). 
17. Binns P., Riley K., Harling O. Epithermal Neutron Beams for Clinical Studies of  Boron Neutron Capture Therapy:  a Dosimetric  Comparison of  Seven  Beams.  Radiat. Res. 2005, v.  164,  no.  2,  pp. 212-220. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1667/RR3404 
18. Zaitsev K.N., Portnov A.A., Mishcherina O.V., Kulakov, V.N., Khokhlov V.F., Meshcherikova V.V., Mitin V.N., Koslovskaya N.G., Sheino I.N. Neutron Capture Therapy at the MEPhI Reactor. International Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2004,  v. 1,  pp. 83-101. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1504/IJNEST.2004.005273 
19. Mitin V.N., Kulakov V.N., Khokhlov V.F., Sheino I.N., Arnopolskaya A.M., Kozlovskaya N.G., Zaitsev K.N., Portnov A.A. Comparison of BNCT and GdNCT Efficacy in Treatment of Canine Cancer. Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 2009, v. 67, iss. 7-8 suppl., pp. S299-S301. 