+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/03.pdf"
first_page="26"
last_page="36"
udc="621.039.544.8"
title="Justification of VVER-1000 safety when using fuel compositions doped by protactinium and neptunium"
original_title="Обоснование безопасности РУ ВВЭР-1000 при использовании топливных композиций с допингом протактиния и нептуния"
authors=["BaatarT", "KulikovEG"]
tags=["ultra-high fuel burn-up", "light water reactor", "protactinium", "neptunium", "moderator temperature coefficient", "fuel temperature coefficient"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.03"

+++

Increasing fuel burn-up is one of the important areas of nuclear power development. The currently most common type of reactots (light-water reactors) is characterized by burn-up at the level of 5% of heavy metal, which means that only a small fraction of fuel is used to generate electricity. 

This paper demonstrates the possibility of a significant increase in fuel burn-up due to the introduction of protactinium and neptunium into fuel composition. The chains of nuclide transformations starting with protactinium and neptunium are characterized by a gradual improvement in the neutron-physical properties, which ensures increased fuel burn-up. In this case, a situation may be observed when neutron-physical properties of the fuel composition improve during the reactor campaign, which indicates that at a certain moment of time the accumulation rate of fissile nuclides exceeds the rate of accumulation of fission products. 

While protactinium is difficult to access in significant quantities, neptunium is contained in spent nuclear fuel, a significant amount of which is in on-site storage facilities. Therefore, from a practical point of view, the introduction of neptunium into fuel composition looks preferable. Significant quantities of protactinium could be accumulated in a hybrid thermonuclear reactor: high-energy neutrons resulting from a fusion reaction are suitable for threshold (n,2n) and (n,γ) reactions which lead to accumulation of protactinium in the thorium blanket. 

The novelity of this work is the analysis of the effect of  protactinium and neptunium on reactivity coefficients during a fuel compaign. The calculations were carried out for a VVER-1000 type reactor using the SCALE-6.2 software package, which is widely used for neutron-physical calculations of nuclear reactors.

### References

1. Klimov A.N. Nuclear Physics and Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1985, 325 p. (in Russian). 
2. Kulikov E., Kulikov G., Kryuchkov E., Shmelev А. Achievement of Higher Burn-up of LWR Fuel by Introduction of 231Pa. Nuclear Physics and Engineering. 2013, v. 4 (4), pp. 291-299. 
3. Shmelev N., Kulikov G., Kulikov E., Apse V. Protactinium-231 as a new fissionable material for nuclear reactors that can produce nuclear fuel with stable neutron-multiplying properties. Kerntechnik. 2016, no. 81(1), pp. 34-37. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3139/ 124.110598 
4. Maershin, A.A., Tsykanov, V.A., Golovanov, V.N. Development and Tests of the Fast Reactor Fuel Elements with Vibropacked Oxide Fuel (VOF). Atomnaya Energiya. 2001, v. 91(5), pp. 378-385. 
5. Subrata B. TIC Benchmark Analysis. Joint IAEA-ICTP Workshop on Nuclear Reaction Data for Advanced Reactor Technologies. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board of India, 2008. 19 p. Available at: http://indico.ictp.it/event/a07153/session/60/contribution/34/material/ 0/0.pdf  (accessed Mar 10, 2019). 
6. SCALE – A Comprehensive Modeling and Simulation Suite for Nuclear Safety Analysis and Design. Available at: http://scale.ornl.gov (accessed Mar 10, 2019). 
7. Gauld I. C., Radulescu G., Ilas G., Murphy B.D., Williams M.L., Wiarda D. Isotopic Depletion and Decay Methods and Analysis Capabilities in SCALE. Nuclear Technology. 1011, v. 174(2), pp. 169-195. DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT11-3 
8. Bowman S.M. Overview of the SCALE Code System. Nuclear Science and Engineering. American Nuclear Society. 2007, v. 97, pp. 589-591. 
9. Rearden B. T., Jessee M. A. SCALE Code System. ORNL/TM-2005/39, Version 6.2. prepared by Oak Ridge National Laboratory for the US Department of Energy. April 2016,  2715 p. 
10. Soppera N., Bossant M., Dupont E. JANIS 4: An Improved Version of the NEA Java-based Nuclear Data Information System. Nuclear Data Sheets, 2014, v. 120, pp. 294-296. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nds.2014.07.071 
11. Shibata K., Iwamoto O., Nakagawa T., Iwamoto N., Ichihara A., Kunieda S., Chiba S., Furutaka K., Otuka N., Ohsawa T., Murata T., Matsunobu H., Zukeran A., Kamada S. and Katakura J. JENDL-4.0: A New Library for Nuclear Science and Engineering. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2011, v. 48(1), pp. 1-30. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/ 18811248.2011.9711675 
12. Maslov V.M., Baba M., Hasegawa A., Kornilov N.V., Kagalenko A.B., Tetereva N.A. Neutron Data Evaluation of 231Pa. International Atomic Energy Agency, INDC(BLR)-019, 2004. 126 p. 
13. Babichev A.P., Babushkina N.A., Bratkovsky A.M. et al. Physical Quantities. Handbook. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1991, 1232 p. (in Russian). 
14. Safety of Nuclear Power Reactors, World Nuclear Association. Available at: http:// www.world-nuclear.org/information-library/safety-and-security/safety-of-plants/ safety-of-nuclear-power-reactors.aspx (accessed Mar 10, 2019). 
15. Bekurtz K., Wirtz K. Neutron Physics. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968. 456 p. (in Russian). 
16. Bell D., Glasstone S. Nuclear Reactor Theory. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1970, 494 p. Available at: http://lib.wwer.ru/fizika-yadernyh-reaktorov/bell-teoriya-yader-reaktorov.zip (accessed Mar 10, 2019) (in Russian). 
17. Thomas W. K., Belle R. U. Dynamics and Control of Nuclear Reactors. Academic press, 2019. 402 p. 
18. Calculator: Water Steam Pro. Available at: http://www.wsp.ru/en/ (accessed Mar 10, 2019). 
19. Kuteev B.V., Khripunov V.I. Modern Consideration of Hybrid Thermonuclear Reactor. VANT. Ser: Termoyadernyj Sintez. 2009, iss. 1, pp. 3-29 (in Russian). 
20. Shmelev A. N., Kulikov G. G., Kurnaev V. A., Salahutdinov G. H., Kulikov E. G., Apse V. A. Hybrid fusion-fission reactor with a thorium blanket: Its potential in the fuel cycle of nuclear reactors. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, pp. 1100-1111. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1134/S1063778815100117 
21. Krumbein A., Lemanska M., Segev M., Wagschal J.J., Yaari A. Reaction Rate Calculations in Uranium and Thorium Blankets Surrounding a Central Deuterium-Tritium Neutron Source. Nuclear Technology, 1980, v. 48, pp. 110-116. DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT80-A32457 
22. Status and Trends in Spent Fuel and Radioactive Waste Management. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series, 2018. 72 p. 
