+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/04.pdf"
first_page="37"
last_page="48"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Estimation of neutronic performance of fast traveling wave reactor in Th-U fuel cycle"
original_title="Оценка нейтронно-физических характеристик быстрого реактора на бегущей волне в уран-плутониевом топливном цикле"
authors=["PomysukhinaAE", "SukharevYuP", "VlasichevGN"]
tags=["traveling wave reactor", "fuel utilization", "thorium", "nuclear burning wave", "nuclear concentration of nuclides", "burn-up", "reactor life"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.04"

+++

The possibility of using nearly all of the uranium or thorium fuel is expected in traveling wave reactors. A traveling wave reactor core with a fast neutron spectrum in a thorium-uranium cycle has been simulated numerically. The reactor core has the shape of a rectangular prism with the ignition zone arranged at one of its ends for forming a neutron-fission wave. Highly enriched uranium metal is used as the ignition zone fuel. Calculated power density dependences and concentrations of nuclides taking part in the transformation chain along the core length at a number of time points have been obtained. The results were graphically processed for the illustrative demonstration of the neutron-fission wave occurrence and transmission in the reactor. The obtained power density dependence is a soliton (solitary wave) featuring a clear time repeatability property. Neutron spectra and fission densities are shown at the initial time point when no wave has yet been formed and at the time of its formation. The wave velocity was calculated based on which the reactor life has been estimated. The fuel burn-up has been estimated the ultra-high value of which makes the proposed reactor concept hard to implement. The burn-up of most of both the raw material and the fissile material produced from it indicates a high potential efficiency of the developed reactor concept in terms of fuel utilization, as well as in terms of nuclear nonproliferation.

### References

1. Zverev D.L. Key objectives of improving the technology of fast-neutron reactors, high- temperature gas-cooled reactors, energy sources of small and medium power based on water-cooled reactors. Proc. of the XI Intern. Scientific.Tech. Conf. «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Energy (MNTK2018)», Moscow, May 2324, 2018. Available at: http:// mntk.rosenergoatom.ru/mediafiles/u/files/2018/Materials/ Zverev_D.L._MNTK_2018.pdf (accessed Jun 20, 2019) (in Russian). 
2. Feynberg S.M., Kunegin E.P. Proceeding of the Second International Conference on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. 1958. v. 9, Nuclear Power Plants, part 2, Discussion, pp. 447-448, United Nation, Geneva. 
3. Feoktistov L.P. Neutron Fission Wave. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR. 1989, v.309, no. 4, pp. 864-867 (in Russian). 
4. Pavlovich V.N., Khotyaintsev V.N., Khotyaintseva E.N. Physical Bases of the Reactor on the Wave of Nuclear Combustion (RVYAG). II. Specific Models. Yaderna Fizika ta Energetika. 2008, no. 3(25), pp. 62-70 (in Bulgarian).
5. Ismail, Yasunori Ohoka, Peng Hong Liem, Hiroshi Sekimoto. Long Life Small CANDLE-HTGRs with Thorium. Ann. Nucl. Energy. 2007, no. 34, pp. 120-129. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.anucene.2006.10.006 
6. Van Dam H. Self-Stabilizing Criticality Waves. Ann. Nucl. Energy. 2000, no. 27, pp. 1505- 1521. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4549(00)00035-9 
7. Gilleland J., Petroski R., Weaver K. The Traveling Wave Reactor: Design and Development. Engineering. 2016, no. 2, pp. 88-96. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2016.01.024 
8. Chen X.-N., Kiefhaber E., Maschek W. Fundamental Burn-Up Mode in a Pebble-Bed Type Reactor. Progress in a Nuclear Energy. 2008, no. 50, pp. 219-224.  DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.pnucene.2007.11.064 
9. Kodochigov N.G., Sorokin S.E., Sukharev Yu.P. Neutron-Physical Aspects of the Rationale for the Concept of an Open-Cycle Fuel Cycle Reactor. Atomnaya Energiya. 2014, v. 117, no. 4, pp. 183-188. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-9914-8 (in Russian). 
10. Pomysukhina A.E., Sukharev Yu.P., Vlasichev G.N. Nuclear Burning Wave Reactor in U-Th Fuel Cycle. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2019, no. 2 (125), pp. 136-147 (in Russian). 
11. Petrov K.G. Neutronics Justification of Conception of Fast Reactor of Traveling Wave Type: Magisterial diss. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva Publ., 2014. 