+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/05.pdf"
first_page="49"
last_page="57"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Influence of different types of reflectors on 99Mo production in VVR-ts’ targets"
original_title="Влияние различных типов отражателей на производство 99Мo в мишенях реактора ВВР-ц"
authors=["KochnovOY", "DanilovPA"]
tags=["VVR-ts reactor", "reflector", "99Mo production", "neutron flux", "power density", "SCALE software package"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.05"

+++

The analysis of placement effectiveness for various types of reflectors in the core of the VVR-ts reactor for the production of 99Mo is carried out. Earlier, a calculation was made of the effect of only a beryllium reflector on the characteristics of the VVR-ts reactor core such as reactivity margin, neutron flux in experimental channels, and accumulated activity of 99Mo. The calculations are based on the formed precision model of the core, which includes one experimental channel, where the targets for 99Mo production are irradiated. The model was created in the SCALE software package. The software package allows a fairly wide range of calculations to be carried out, from criticality assessment to the tasks of assessing the radiation situation. 

As a result of the computational analysis of the model, such characteristics were obtained as the effective multiplication factor, energy release in the targets for 99Mo generation, the neutron flux in the target raw material, and the amount of 99Mo generated after 120 hours of irradiation. The data were compared with the results of similar calculations of the parameters of the core of the VVR-ts reactor. Further, on the basis of reference literature, a list of widely used materials as a reflector or moderator in the reactor core was formed. Based on it, several models were formed and analyzed in which the water space at the periphery of the core was replaced with the researched materials. The calculation results showed that the maximum production of 99Mo is achieved when placing a beryllium reflector. Placement of other types of reflectors does not significantly increase production compared to an already placed water reflector.

### References

1. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V. Influence of Beryllium Reflector Placed in Active Zone of VVR-ts Reactor on its Neutron Physics Characteristics. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 2, pp. 22-125 (in Russian). 
2. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V. Estimation of 99Mo Production Increase at Various Core Layouts on VVR-ts Reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 1, pp. 110-147 (in Russian). 
3. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V. Evaluation of Energy Release in Targets with Uranium Containing Material for Production of 99Mo with Using of Advanced Design Targets on VVR-ts Reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 4, pp. 23-29. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2012.4.03 (in Russian). 
4. Kolesov V.V., Kochnov O.Yu., Fomin R.V. Improvement of Neutron-Physical Characteristics of VVR-ts by Means of Replacement of a Part of  Core Fuel Assembly by a Beryllium Reflector. Atomnaya Energiya. 2015, v. 118, no. 4, pp. 191-193 (in Russian). 
5. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V., Fomichenko P.A. Possibility of Increasing the Number of  Experimental Channels VVR-ts by Means of Core Design Change. Atomnaya Energiya, 2018, v. 125, no. 3, pp. 146-147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-018-00460-7 (in Russian). 
6. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Zeviakin A.S., Fomin R.V. Thermal Hydraulic Calculation of Maximum Fuel and Water Temperature in MAK-2 Unit. Atomnaya Energiya. 2019, v. 127, no. 3, pp. 135-137. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00601-x (in Russian). 
7. Fomin R.V., Kolesov V.V., Zeviakin A.S., Kochnov O.Yu. Estimation of 99Mo Production Increase Using Advanced Design Targets at the VVR-ts Reactor. Proc. of the II International Conference of Young Scientists, Specialists, Post-graduate Students «Innovative Nuclear Reactors of Small and Super Low Power», 15-17 May 2017. SC «Rosatom», National Research Nuclear University «MEPhI». Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2017, pp. 14-15 (in Russian). 
8. Kolmykov V.Yu., Zeviakin A.S., Fomin R.V., Sobolev A.V. Modernization of the target design for production of molybdenum. Proc. of the XIII International Scientific-Practical Conference «The Future of Nuclear Power Engineering (AtomFuture 2017)», November 27-30, 2017. Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2018, pp. 8-9 (in Russian). 
9. Kolmykov V.Yu., Zeviakin A.S., Fomin R.V. Modernization of the target design for the radioisotope operating time. Proc. of the II International (XV Regional) Scientific Conference «Technogenic Systems and Ecological Risk», April 19-20, 2018. Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2018, pp. 15-16 (in Russian). 
10. Kolmykov V.Yu., Zeviakin A.S., Fomin R.V., Sobolev A.V. Comparison of the Thermal-Hydraulic Characteristics of Targets for Molybdenum Production. Proc. of the VII International Youth Scientific School-Conference «Modern Problems of Physics and Technologies», April 16-21, 2018. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2018, pp. 236-237 (in Russian). 
11. Kolmykov V.Yu., Zeviakin A.S. Modernization of Target Design for Radioisotope Production of VVR-ts Reactor. Proc. of the XIV International Scientific-Practical Conference «The Future of Nuclear Power Engineering», November 29-30, 2018. Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2019, pp. 4-5 (in Russian). 
12. Kolmykov V.Yu., Zeviakin A.S., Fomin R.V. Thermal-Hydraulic Calculation of a Rod Type Target for the Radioisotope Operating Time. Proc. of the III International Conference of Young Scientists, Specialists, Post-graduates and Students «Innovative Nuclear Reactors of Small and Extra Low Power», May 15-16, 2018. Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2018, pp. 52-53 (in Russian). 
13. Bobkov V.P., Blokhin A.I., Zabudko L.M., Kazantsev G.N., Rumyantsev V.N., Smogalev I.P., Tarasikov V.P. Handbook of Material Properties for Advanced Reactor Technologies. Vol. 4. Properties of Moderators. Ed. by Prof. V.M. Poplavsky. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2012, 408 p. (in Russian). 
14. Rearden B.T. and Jessee M.A. SCALE Code System, ORNL/TM-2005/39, Ver. 6.2.1, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee (2016). Available from Radiation Safety Information Computational Center as CCC-834 
15. Kolesov V.V., Kochnov O.Yu., Volkov Yu.V., Ukraintsev V.F., Fomin R.V. Creation of Precision Model of the VVR-ts Reactor for Subsequent Optimization of its Design and Production of 99Mo and other Radionuclides. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no. 4, pp. 129-146 (in Russian). 
16. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V., Zherdev G.M. Evaluation of Increase in 131I Production Using Tellurium Targets of Improved Design at the VVR-ts Reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 102-110. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.4.11 (in Russian). 