+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/08.pdf"
first_page="78"
last_page="88"
udc="621.039.531"
title="Effects of neutron irradiationon physical and mechanical properties of refractory metals"
original_title="Влияние нейтронного облучения на физикомеханические свойства тугоплавких металлов "
authors=["ZakharovaMI", "TarasikovVP"]
tags=["neutron irradiation", "refractory metals", "molybdenum", "tungsten", "vanadium", "niobium", "rhenium", "radiation defects", "impurity atoms", "electrical resistance", "internal friction", "elastic modulus", "swelling"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.08"

+++

Investigation of interaction between radiation defects and crystal lattice defects in the initial state allows distinguishing the contribution of each type of defects in the change of physical and mechanical properties of the material under irradiation.

The following similarities and differences in the behavior of metals under irradiation were identified in the present paper by comparing evolution of the properties of metals with the b.c.c. lattice (Mo, W, V, Nb) и h.c.p. lattice (Re): 

– both h.c.p. and b.c.c. crystals exhibit dependence of properties on orientation; notably, the increase in the size of the sample in all crystallographic directions is characteristic for b.c.c. metals, while narrowing of the sample along the direction <0001> perpendicular to the plane with most dense packing of atoms and expansion along other directions takes place for h.c.p. crystals; 

– elasticity moduli for metals with the b.c.c. lattice reduce, and shear modulus for h.c.p. metals is significantly increased under irradiation;

– electrical resistance for group VI metals (Mo, W) and rhenium increases as the result of irradiation, and that for group V metals (V, Nb) decreases. Reduction of electrical resistance is associated with the release of impurity interstitial atoms on radiation defects; 

– relaxation processes for b.c.c. crystals develop both in non-irradiated and in irradiated samples, while in h.c.p. crystals only irradiation and post-irradiation annealing initiate the temperature dependence of internal friction (t.d.i.f.) and the appearance of the relaxation maximum due to the change of the point symmetry of the defect; 

– specificity of behavior under irradiation of metals with different types of crystal lattice remain for isochronous annealing up to 0.7⋅Tm.

### References

1. Neklyudov I.M., Voevodin V.N., Laptev I.N., Parkhomenko A.A. On the Effect of Irradiation on Elastic Modules of Metal Materials. VANT. Ser. Fizika Radiatsionnykh Povrezhdeniy i Radiatsionnoe Materialovedenie. 2014, iss. 2 (90), pp. 21-28 (in Russian). 
2. Koryukin V.A., Churin V.A. Diffusion and Thermal Emission of Mo-W-Emitters of Electric Generating Channels. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2017, iss. 5, pp. 79-86 (in Russian). 
3. Zakharova M.I. Tarasikov V.P. Thermal Stability of Radiation Effects in Single-Crystal Vanadium. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2018, iss. 4(95), pp. 4-15 (in Russian).
4. Blanter M.S., Dmitriev V.V., Mogutnov B.M., Ruban A.V. Interaction of Implanted Atoms and the Configuration of their Contribution to the Thermodynamic Activity in the V, Nb and Ta. Fizika Metallov i Metallovedenie. 2017, v. 118, no. 2, pp. 111-118. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1134/S0031918X17020016 (in Russian). 
5. Birzhevoy G.A., Zakharova M. I., Tarasikov V. P.  Studies of the Formation of Complexes of Atoms of Implementation - Substitution into Ferritic-artensitic steel EP-823 at Different Heat Treatment. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2019, iss. 2(98), pp. 4-11 (in Russian). 
6. Zakharova M.I., Artemov N.A., Bogdanov V.V. The Influence of Neutron Irradiation and Annealing on the Elastic Modulus and Electrical Resistance of Single Crystals of Molybdenum and Tungsten. Neorganicheskie Materialy. 2001, v. 37, no. 8, pp. 931-935. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1023/A:1017979230262 (in Russian). 