+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/10.pdf"
first_page="98"
last_page="106"
udc="621.039.534"
title="The results of studies on the extension of methodological capabilities of determining physico-chemical conditions of lead-based liquid-metal coolants"
original_title="Результаты исследований по расширению по расширению методических возможностей определения физико-химического состояния жидкометаллических теплоносителей на основе свинца"
authors=["SalaevSV", "AskhadullinRS", "IvanovKD", "LegkikhAY", "NiyazovSAS"]
tags=["mass transfer", "coolant", "lead", "lead-bismuth", "structural steel", "oxide film", "oxygen", "iron", "thermodynamic activity", "mass content of impurity", "oxygen activity sensor"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.10"

+++

With regard to the problem of expanding the methodological capabilities of determining the physicochemical state of heavy heat lead/bismuth-based coolants, the authors consider the application of the thermal cycling method for these coolants with simultaneous measurement of the thermodynamic activity parameter of oxygen impurities. In these experiments, structural EI852 and EP823 ferritic- martensitic steels as well as EP302 austenitic steel were used as sources of iron impurities. 

As a result of the experiments, it was found that iron oxides previously formed in the coolant, as such or in the form of an oxide film on the structural steels, are not inert phases in heavy coolants, but can exchange iron and oxygen with the melt. The nature of this exchange depends both on the actual coolant impurity state and on external conditions, first of all, on temperature.

The experimental data obtained by thermal cycling of lead and lead-bismuth coolants were analyzed both in the region of relatively high oxygen TDA values close to the oxygen saturation concentration and in the region of sufficiently low values of this parameter close to the saturation concentration of iron impurities. 

It is concluded that the proposed coolant thermal cycling method is informationally significant and can be recommended for further use, for example, to obtain quantitative data on the content of iron impurities in the coolant.

### References

1. Gromov B.F., Shmatko B.A. Oxidation Potential of Lead and Bismuth Melts. Izvesyiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 1997, no. 6, pp. 14-18 (in Russian). 
2. Martinelli L., Balbaud-Ce ’le ’rier  F. Modelling of the Oxide Scale Formation on Fe-Cr Steel During Exposure in Liquid Lead-bismuth Eutectic in the 450 – 600°C Temperature Range. Materials and Corrosion. 2011, v. 62, pp. 531-542. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ maco.201005871 
3. Mulier G. Status on Liquid Metal Corrosion, Mechanical Properties and Corrosion Protection Research at FZK and in Collaboration with Partners. Proc. of the Conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC2008)». Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2008, p. 20. 
4. Chernov M.E, Martynov P.N, Gulevsky V.A.  Development of Electrochemical Oxygen Sensor of the Capsular Type for Monitoring and Control of the Heavy Coolant State. Proc. of the Conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC2003)». Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2003, p. 85 (in Russian). Available at: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10512-005-0215-5 (accessed Aug 17, 2019). 
5. Askhadullin R.Sh., Martynov P.N, Sysoev Yu.M. Oxygen Thermodynamic Activity Control in Lead and Lead-Bismuth Coolants by the Oxides Dissolution Method. Proc. of the Conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC2003)». Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2003, p. 82. (in Russian). Available at: https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84987935099&origin=resultslist&sort=plf-f&src=s&st1=Oxygen+Thermodynamic+Activity+Control+in+Lead+and+Lead-Bismuth+Coolants+by+the+Oxides+Dissolution+Method&st2=&sid= b5ca775998d0f7ed3989ec71bcd00eb5&sot=b&sdt=b&sl=119&s=TITLE-ABS-KEY%28Oxygen+Thermodynamic+Activity+Control+in+Lead+and+Lead-Bismuth+Coolants+by+the+Oxides+Dissolution+Method%29&relpos=0&citeCnt=4&searchTerm= (accessed Aug 17, 2019). 
6. Ivanov K.D. Lavrova O.V., Salayev S.V. The Use of the Developed Technique for Estimation of Metal Components Diffusion Yield from Steels to Study Corrosion Resistance of These Steels in Heavy Coolants. Proc. of the Conference «ThermoHydraulic Safety Aspects of NPP’s with Fast Reactors». Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2005, p. 117 (in Russian). 
7. Ivanov K.D., Lavrova O.V., Martynov P.N. Thermodynamics of Pb-O System and Solubility of Oxygen in Lead Melt. Proc. of the Conference «Problems of Technology and Thermal Hydraulics of LiquidMetal Heat Carriers». – Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2002 (in Russian). 