+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/11.pdf"
first_page="107"
last_page="120"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Relations for calculating the transport and thermodynamic properties of lead-bismuth eutectics"
original_title="Соотношения для расчета транспортных и термодинамических свойств эвтектики свинец-висмут"
authors=["ChusovIA", "PronyaevVG", "NovikovGE", "ObysovNA"]
tags=["lead-bismuth eutectic", "heat capacity", "thermal conductivity", "local sound velocity", "regression", "density", "viscosity"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.11"

+++
The eutectic lead-bismuth alloy has relatively recently begun to be used as a coolant primarily in nuclear transport power plants. At present, this eutectic is regarded as a possible coolant for promising new generation reactor plants.

The generalized systematic analysis of the results of experiments to determine the transport and thermodynamic properties of lead-bismuth eutectics was carried out by P.L. Kirillov with his staff and published back in 1998. However, they do not include numerous experimental results of studies of Russian specialists, which are characterized by methodical thoughtfulness, use of modern instrumentation and careful data processing. The emergence of new data has led to the need to clarify and correct the existing computational relationships. 

Recommended ratios for calculating the thermodynamic and transport properties of lead-bismuth eutectics (44.5% Pb + 55.5% Bi) are presented: density, coefficient of dynamic viscosity, specific heat capacity, thermal conductivity coefficient, surface tension coefficient, specific electrical resistance and local sound velocity as a function of temperature. The mentioned relations are based on the calculated analysis of data given in 38 experimental works carried out in our country and abroad and published for the period from 1923 to 2015. The authors had information about 1085 experimental points, but only 1058 points were suitable for direct estimates. The main difficulty in data processing was that the experiments considered in the work were carried out at different times using various measurement methods, ununiform statistical processing methods, different degree of bismuth purity, etc. The basis of data evaluation methods was a modified method of least squares, which allowed taking into account the errors of the experimental data accepted for consideration. 

Error values of the proposed relations and temperature ranges of their applicability are given in this paper. The article is based on the results of the work of the Thermodynamic Properties Data Center (TsDTS IATE NIYaU MIFI) of Rosatom State Corporation. 


### References

1. Toshinsky G.I., Stepanov V.S., Nikitin L.B., Zrodnikov A.V., Komlev O.G. Analysis of Operating Experience of Lead-Bismuth Reactor Units and Accidents. Proc. of the Conf. «Heavy liquid9metal coolants in nuclear technologies», TZhMT998. Obninsk. SSC RF9FEI, 1999, v. 1, pp. 63-69 (in Russian). 
2. Zrodnikov A.V., Toshinsky G.I., Stepanov V.S. Conversion of Lead-Bismuth Reactor Technology: from Submarine Reactors to Power Reactors and Ways to Increase Investment Attractiveness of Fast Reactor Based Nuclear Power Engineering. IAEA CN A3. Reports at the IAEA International Conf. «Fifty Years of Nuclear Power – the Next Fifty Years» Obninsk, 27 June -2 July, 2004 (in Russian). 
3. Dzhangobegov V.V., Piminov V.A., Mokhov V.A., Schekin I.G., Stepanov V.S., Ignatov A.V., Lisenkov E.A., Klimkin A.S.. Modern Projects of OKB GIDROPRESS. Development and Implementation. Appendix to the scientific and technical collection of VANT. Ser. Obespechenie Bezopasnosti AES. 2015, iss. 35, «Reaktornye Ustanovki ». Podolsk. JSC OKB GIDROPRESS Publ., 2015, 64 p. (in Russian). 
4. Kirillov P.L. Thermophysical Properties of Lead, Bismuth and their Eutectic Alloy. FEI90286 Review. Moscow. TsNIIAtominform Publ., 1998, 28 p. (in Russian). 
5. Handbook on Lead9bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermalhydraulics and Technologies. 2015 Edition. OECD 2015. NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY. NEA. No. 7268. 
6. Sobolev V. Database of Thermophysical Properties of Liquid Metal Coolants for GEN-IV. Sodium, Lead, Lead-Bismuth Eutectic (and Bismuth). Scientific Report of the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre, SCK•CEN-BLG-1069, November 2010 (rev. Dec. 2011). 
7. Chusov I.A., Obysov N.A., Novikov G.E., Pronyaev V.G. Estimated Ratios for Determining the Thermodynamic Properties of Lead Coolant. VANT. Ser: Fizika Yadernykh Reactorov. 2019, iss. 2, pp. 83-91 (in Russian). 
8. Bogoslovskaya G.P. Kirillov P.L., Kupiz J., Heusener G., Nishi Y., Rineikii A., Stangulesku A., Wade D., Yarovitsin V.V. Comparative Assessment of Thermophysical and Thermohydraulic Characteristics of Lead, Lead-Bismuth and Sodium Coolants for Fast Reactors. IAEA TECDOC9 1289, IAEA, Vienna, 2002. 
9. Lyon R.N. Liquid Metals Handbook, 2-nd ed. Washington, USA: US Atomic Energy Commission and Dept. of the Navy, 1952. 733 p. 
10. Miller R.R., Lyon R.N. et al. Physical Properties of Liquid Metals, Liquid Metals Handbook, R.N. Lyon (ed.), 2nd Ed., Report NAVEXOS P-733, Atomic Energy Commission and Dept. of the Navy, Washington, USA, 1954. 
11. Kutateladze S.S., Borishansky V.M., Novikov I.I., Fedynsky O.S. Liquid9Metal Coolants. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1958, 298 p. (in Russian). 
12. Bonilla C.F. Heat Transfer, Chapter 2 in «Reactor Handbook», 2nd Ed. (rev., enl.), Vol. IV, Engineering, S. McLain and J.H. Martens (Eds.). Interscience Publishers, New York, USA, 1964. 
13. Alchagirov B.B., Kurshev O.I., Brain A.G. Surface Tension of Liquid Lead-Bismuth Eutectics at Technically Important Temperatures. Perspektivnye Materialy. 2003, no. 6, pp. 50-54 (in Russian). 
14. Stankus S.V., Hairulin R.A., Brain A.G. Density of molten lead-bismuth eutectics at high temperatures. (in Russian) Perspektivnye Materialy. 2004, no. 4, pp. 38-43 (in Russian). 
15. Alchagirov B.B., Shamparov T.M., Brain A.G. Experimental study of molten lead-bismuth eutectics density. Teplofizika Vysokikh Temperatur. 2003, v. 41, iss. 2, pp. 247-253 (in Russian). 
16. Stankus S.V., Hairulin R.A., Mozgovoi A.G. Thermal Properties of Liquid Metallic Thermal Carrier for Fast Neutron Nuclear Reactors. Perspektivnye Materialy. 2005, no. 3, pp. 41-45 (in Russian). 
17. Khairulin R.A., Lyapunov K.M., Mozgovoi A.G., Stankus S.V., Ulyusov P.V. Crystallization and Relaxation Phenomena in the Bismuth-Lead Eutectic. Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 2005, v. 387, pp. 183-186. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2004.06.045. 
18. Stankus S.V., Khayrulin R.A., Mozgovoi A.G. Thermal Properties of Liquid Metal Coolant for Fast Neutron Reactors. Perspektivnye Materialy. 2005, no. 3, pp. 41-45 (in Russian). 
19. Stankus S.V., Khairulin R.A., Mozgovoy A.G., Roshchupkin V.V., Pokrasin M.A. The density of the liquid metal coolant based on lead-bismuth eutectic at high temperatures. Teplofizika Vysokikh Temperatur. 2006, v. 44, iss. 2, pp. 307-310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10740-006-0038-7 (in Russian).
20. Stankus S.V., Khairulin R.A., Mozgovoy A.G., Roshchupkin V.V. and Pokrasin M.A. The Density and Thermal Expansion of Eutectic Alloys of Lead with Bismuth and Lithium in Condensed State. XII9th International Conference on Liquid and Amorphous Metals IOP Publishing. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2008, v. 98; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/ 1742-6596/98/6/062017. 
21. Holman J.P. Heat Transfer. MacGraw-Hill, 1964, USA. 463 p. 
22. Kaplun A.B., Shugaev V.M., Minakov S.P., Varlamov Yu.D. Viscosity of the Eutectic Alloy Lead-Bismuth. In the collection: Thermophysical Properties of Substances and Materials. Novosibirsk. Institute of Thermophysics, Siberian Branch of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR Publ., 1979, p. 105 (in Russian). 
23. Plevachuk Yu., Sklyarchuk V., Eckert S., Gerbeth G. Some Physical Data of the Near Eutectic Liquid Lead-Bismuth. J. Nucl. Mater. 1008, v. 373, pp. 335-342. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2007.06.014. 
24. Kirillov P.L. Thermophysical Properties of Materials for Nuclear Engineering: A Tutorial and Collection of Data. IAEA, Vienna, 2008, 167 p. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/ MTCD/Publications/PDF/IAEA-THPH_web.pdf (accessed Oct 10, 2019). 
25. Filippov V.V., Yagodin D.A., Borisenko A.V., Shunyaev K.Yu. and Gelchinski B.R. Density, Viscosity, Ultrasound Velocity, and Electrical Resistivity of the Eutectic Lead-Bismuth Melt. Russian Metallurgy (Metally), 2016, no. 8, pp. 705-708. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/ S0036029516020038. 
26. Hultgren R., Desai P.D., Hawkins D.T., Gleiser M., Kelley K.K. Selected Values of the Thermodynamic Properties of Binary Alloys. ASM, Metals Park, Ohio, USA, 1973, 1435 p. 
27. Brown W.B. Thermal Conductivities of Some Metals in the Solid and Liquid States. Physical Review. 1923, v. 22, p. 171. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.22.171. 
28. Mikryukov V.E., Tyapunina N.A. Investigation of the Temperature Dependence of the Thermal Conductivity, Electrical Conductivity and Heat Capacity of Bi, Pb and the Bi-Pb Alloy System. Fizika Metallov i Metallovedenie. 1956, no. 1, pp. 31-41 (in Russian). 
29. Nikolsky N.A., Kalakutskaya N.A., Pchelkin I.M. Thermophysical Properties of some Metals and Alloys in the Molten State. In: Heat Transfer Issues. Moscow. USSR Academy of Sciences Publ,, 1959, pp. 11-45 (in Russian). 
30. Powell R.W., Tye R.P. Experimental determination of the thermal and electrical conductivities of molten metals. Proc. of the Conf. «Thermodinamic and Transport Properties of Fluids». London: Inst. Mech. Eng., 1958, pp. 182-187. 
31. Imbeni V., Martini C., Masini S., Palombarini G. Stato dell’arte sulle proprietа chimico-fisiche del Pb e Pb-Bi. Parte II. Proprieta di Pb e Pb-Bi, Na, in Studio di un acceleratore superconduttivo di protoni di grande potenza e studio di un sistema sottocritico da esso sostenuto per il bruciamento dei residui radioattivi, Sottotema 2: Prove di corrosione, BoMet, Accordo di programma ENEA/INFN-MURST, Settore Ambiente, December 1999 (in Italian). 
32. Miller R.R. Physical Properties of Liquid Metals. In: Liquid Metal Handbook. Lyon R.N. (2- nd Ed.), Report NAVEXOS P-733, Atomic Energy Commission and Dept. of the Navy, Washington, USA, June 1952 (rev. 1954). 
33. Lyon R.N. Liquid Metals Handbook, 2-nd ed. – Washington, USA: US Atomic Energy Commission and Dept. of the Navy, 1952. 733 p. 
34. Pokrovsky N.L., Pugachevich P.P., Golubev P.A. Study of the Surface Tension of Lead- Bismuth Solutions. Zhurnal Fizicheskoy Khimii. 1969, v. 43, iss. 8, pp. 2158-2159 (in Russian). 
35. Kazakova N.V., Lyamkin S.A., Lepinskikh B.M. Density and Surface Tension of Pb-Bi System Melts. Zhurnal Fizicheskoy Khimii. 1984, v. 58, iss. 6, pp. 1534-1538 (in Russian). 
36. Novakovich R., Richchi E., Giuranno D., Gnechcho F. Surface Properties of Bi-Pb Liquid Alloys. Surface Sci. 2002, v. 515, pp. 377-389. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0039-6028(02)01923-4. 
37. Pastor Torres F.C. Surface Tension Measurement of Heavy Liquid Metals Related to Accelerator Driven Systems (ADS), Diploma Thesis, FZK (IKET), KALLA, April 2003.
38. Semenchenko V.K. Surface Phenomena in Metals and Alloys.  Moscow. State Publishing House of Technical and Theoretical Literature, 1957, 491 p. (in Russian). 
39. Stremousov V.I.; Solomin B.A. Speed of Sound in the Triple Liquid-Metal System Bi-Pb-Sn. Zhurnal Fizicheskoy Khimii. 1975, v. 49, iss. 8, pp. 1972-1974 (in Russian). 
40. Kazys R., Voleisis A., Sliteris R. Voleishiene B., Mazheika L., Kupschus P. Development of Ultrasonic Sensors for Operation in a Heavy Liquid Metal. IEEE Sensors Journal. 2006, v. 6, iss. 5, pp.1134- 1143. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2006.877997. 
41. Hirabayashi M., Ara K., Kondo M., Takahashi, M. Development of ultrasonic flow meter for liquid lead-bismuth flow. Proc. of the XIII9th Int. Conf. on Nuclear Engineering, Beijing, China, May 16920, 2005. ICONE13-50346. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/search/ search.aspx?orig_q=author:”Kondo, M.” (accessed Oct 10, 2019). 
42. GSSSD 236-2009. Tables of Standard Reference Data. Speed of Sound in Liquid Lead, Bismuth and their Eutectic Alloy in the Range From Melting Temperatures up to 1300 K. Moscow. FGUP «STANDARTINFOTM» Publ., 2009, 32 p. (in Russian). 
43. Popel’ P.S., Yagodin D.A., Mozgovoy A.G., Pokrasin M.A. An Experimental Study of the Speed of Sound in Molten Lead, Bismuth, and their Mutual Eutectic Alloy at High Temperatures. Teplofizika Vysokikh Temperatur. 2010, v. 48, iss. 2, pp. 198-205. Available at: https://gsssd-rosatom.mephi.ru/biblio-pdf/003/pdf/ (accessed Oct 10, 2019). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0018151X10020070 (in Russian). 