+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-19T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2020-01"
issue_name="2020 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/01/12.pdf"
first_page="121"
last_page="133"
udc="621.039.52"
title="Conceptual issues of cold filter-traps development for sodium coolant purification in fast reactors"
original_title="Концептуальные вопросы разработки холодных фильтр-ловушек для очистки натриевого теплоносителя в реакторах на быстрых нейтронах"
authors=["AlekseevVV", "KuzinaJuA", "SorokinAP"]
tags=["fast reactors", "sodium coolant", "cold trap", "reactor vessel", "experiment", "computation code", "thermal hydraulics", "mass transfer", "impurities", "oxygen", "hydrogen", "argon cooling", "sodium cooling"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.12"

+++

Results of investigation of specific features of heat and mass transfer in cold traps for sodium purification from impurities in fast reactor loops performed both in special experimental sections modeling various zones of the trap -isothermal and non- isothermal sedimentation tanks and filters and the final cooling zone, and on prototype trap models are presented. As the result, a scientific justification was formulated for the development of innovative trap design for different reactors. Impurity trapping capacity of such traps is higher than that for the best foreign analogues by 3 – 5 times. Tests of traps demonstrated highly efficient sodium purification from oxygen and hydrogen and significantly lower capacity with respect to corrosion products and carbon. Taking into account that leaks of radioactive sodium during operation of the traps in the primary cooling loop of BN-600 reactor, the decision was made to install the coolant purification system inside the reactor vessel for enhancing the reactor safety. The issue of eliminating accumulation of hydrogen in traps of the primary cooing loop when the reactor is operated in nominal operation mode was resolved. Two designs of a cold trap were suggested - with argon cooling and with sodium cooling. It was demonstrated that 20 replacements of traps are required during the reactor lifespan when the reactor coolant purification system with argon cooling is utilized, with 7 replacements needed if hydrogen accumulation in the cold traps of the primary cooling loop is prevented. The option of sodium-cooled trap built into the reactor vessel has the same overall dimensions as the argon-cooled trap. Cooling sodium is circulated through two cooling paths: up to 30% of the flow rate in the jacket on the outside of the working cavity and up to 70% of the flow along the coil installed inside the working cavity. Based on the calculations using the developed codes for simulating heat and mass transfer processes in the traps the improving technical solutions were proposed. 

### References

1. Kozlov F.A., Volchkov L.G., Kuznetsov E.K., Matyuchin V.V. Liquid Metal Coolants for Nuclear Power Plants. Purification of Impurities and Their Control. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 128 p. (in Russian). 
2. Kozlov F.A., Alekseev V.V., Zagorulko Yu.I., Sergeev G.P., Volchkov L.G., Kozub P.S., Kovalev Yu.P., Vorob’eva T.A., Volov A.N. The results of the development of technology for using sodium as coolant for fast-neutron reactors. Teploenergetika, 2007, v. 54, no. 12, pp. 942- 954. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601507120026 (in Russian). 
3. Rachkov V.I., Poplavskii V.M., Tsibulya A.M., Bagdasarov Yu.E., Vasiliev B.A., Kamanin Y.L., Osipov S.L., Kuzavkov N.G., Ershov V.N., Ashirmetov M.R. Concept of an Advanced Power- Generating Unit with a BN-1200 Sodium Cooled Fast Reactor. Atomnaya Energiya, 2010, v. 108, no. 4, pp. 254-259. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-010-9286-z (in Russian). 
4. Vasiliev B.A., Vasyaev A.V., Zverev D.L., Shepelev S.F., Ashirmetov M.R., Ershov V.N., Onufrienko S.V., Goverdovskij A.A., Poplavskij V.M., Trufanov A.A., Oshkanov N.N. Iinnovative Project of the BN-1200 Power Unit as the Basis for the Evolutionary Development of the BN Direction. Proc. of the IV-th International Scientific and Technical Conference «Innovative designs and technologies of nuclear power (ISTC NIKIET-2016». Moscow. AO NIKIET Publ., 2016, pp. 38-40 (in Russian). 
5. Kozlov F.A., Alexeev V.V., Kovalev Yu.P., Kumaev V.Ya., Matyuchin V.V., Orlova E.A., Pirogov E.P., Sorokin A.P., Shcherbakov S.I. Studies validating a sodium purification system for fast reactors. Atomnaya Energiya, 2012, v. 112, no. 1, pp. 21-28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-012-9519-4 (in Russian). 
6. Alekseev V.V., Kovalev Yu.P., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Kumaev V.Ya., Kondratev A.S., Matyuchin V.V., Pirogov E.P., Sergeev G.P., Sorokin A.P., Torbenkova I.Yu. Sodium Coolant Purification System for a Nuclear Power Station Equipped with a BN-1200 Reactor. Teploenergetika, 2013, v. 60, no. 5, pp. 311-322. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/ S0040601513050017 (in Russian). 
7. Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Alekseev V.V., Shcherbakov S.I., Kondratev A.S., Varseev E.V. Investigation in support of the sodium purification system integrated in the reactor tank. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika, 2014, no. 2, pp. 81-89. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.09 (in Russian). 
8. Sorokin A.P., Trufanov A.A. Sodium Purification in NPP with Fast-Neutron Reactors. VANT. Ser. Yaderno$Reaktornye Konstanty. 2017, iss. 3, pp. 142-162. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2017/3/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/1381-12.html (accessed Oct 04, 2019) (in Russian). 
9. Varseev E.V., Konovalov M.A., Alekseev V.V. Results of Heat and Mass Transfer Numerical Modeling in the Cold Trap Mockup. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty, 2014, iss. 2, pp. 106-113. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/images/pdf/2014/2-11.pdf (accessed Oct 04, 2019) (in Russian). 
10. Alekseev V.V., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Varseev E.V., Kumaev V.Ya., Kondrat’ev A.S. Calculation of impurity mass transfer in cold traps with sodium cooling. Atomnaya Energiya, 2015, v. 118, no. 5, pp. 318-323. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-9999-0 (in Russian). 
11. Alekseev A.A., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Varseev E.V., Kumaev V.Ya., Kondrat’ev A.S. Calculation of Mass Transfer of Impurities in Cold Traps with Sodium Cooling. Proc. of the Sci. and Techn. Conference «Thermophysics of fast neutron reactors (Thermophysics 2014)». Obninsk: SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2015, pp. 380-385 (in Russian). 
12. Alekseev V.V., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Trufanov A.A., Kryuchkov E.A., Varseev E.V., Konovalov M.A., Torbenkova I.Y. Sodium-Bench Testing of a Cold-Trap Model. Atomnaya Energiya, 2017, v. 122, no. 1, pp. 35-41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0232-1 (in Russian). 
13. Kozlov F.A., Volchkov L.G. New Way to Regenerate Traps for Purification of Alkaline Liquid Metal Coolants. Atomnaya Energiya, 1975, v. 39, no. 4, p. 310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01261913 (in Russian). 