+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="01"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="21"
udc="621.039"
title="New generation first of the kind unit – VVER 1200 design features"
original_title="Головной блок нового поколения – особенности проекта ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["AsmolovVG", "GusevIN", "KazanskiyVR", "PovarovVP", "StatsuraDB"]
tags=["NPP-2006", "rector", "steam generator", "power unit", "safety system", "accident", "APCS", "operation", "equipment", "containment", "accumulator tank"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.01"

+++

The paper is concerned with the commissioning of the new generation NPP-2006 power unit with the VVER-1200 reactor. A comparison is made between the characteristics of the new NvNPP II-1 and commercial VVER-1000 power units (B-320). Some design and circuit solutions used in the NPP-2006 project, which allowed increasing the installed capacity of the power unit, are described as well. The installed higher capacity of the power unit was achieved, in particular, due to increasing the primary circuit pressure by 0.5 MPa and the steam generator pressure by 0.6 MPa as well as improving the main circulation pump by 2000 m3/h. The main differences in the equipment and the composition of passive and active safety systems of the NPP-2006 power unit are considered. A brief description of the safety systems first applied at Russian power units is given, e.g., a two-channel structure of active safety systems with redundant emergency pumps in each channel, a double containment, a core melt localization device, a passive heat removal system, etc. Due to the increased number of BRU-Ks, it was possible to increase their performance from 15 to 3 seconds, which significantly improved the maneuverability of the power unit in abnormal conditions.

The structure of the APCS is considered, which is applied in the NPP-2006 project, using programmable technology based on the TELEPERM XS platform. The peculiarities of commissioning of the power unit are analyzed, problematic issues that have arisen at various stages of the construction are revealed, some data on the tests carried out and the results of these tests are also given.

Finally, an analysis is made of some design deficiencies revealed during the construction and commissioning of the power unit, an evaluation of the project was made, and proposals were formulated to finalize the VVER-1200 project for consideration in the subsequent NPP projects.

### References

1. Andrushechko S.А., Afrov A.М., Vasiliev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.М., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with VVER21000. Starting from operation principles to design evolution. Мoscow. Logos Publ., 2010. 604 p. (in Russian).
3. Fortov V.G., Poppel О.S. Nuclear power engineering in the present2day world. Moscow. Intellect Publ., 2011. – 168 p. (in Russian).
4. Rodionov V.G. Power engineering. Today’s challenges and future possibilities. Мoscow. Enas Publ., 2010. 352 p. (in Russian).
4. Novovoronezh NPP. Design AES-2006. Available at http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed 20.08.2017) (in Russian).
5. European Utility Requirements for LWR Nuclear Power Plants Rev. C, Vol. 2, 2001. Available at http://www.europeanutilityrequirements.org (accessed 20.08.2017).
6. Krushelnitsky V.N., Topchiyan R.M. Preliminary safety analysis report. General description of NPP. Novovoronezh NNP22 Unit 1. Moscow. JSC Atomenergoproject Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
7. Shutikov А.V. Power ramping up and experience of NPP operation at increased power level. Perspectives of further power ramping up to 110 and 112%. Collected papers of VIIth International scientific-technical conference «Safety, efficiency and economy of nuclear power engineering». Мoscow. JSC Rosenergoatom Publ., 2010. 217 p. (in Russian).
8. Kalyaev I.A., Korobkin V.V., Baiklin V.F., Shkarovsky A.N. Improving the safety of nuclear power plants through the introduction of new technologies. Nuclear power plants. Twenty years after the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Moscow. Concern «Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2006, pp. 246-250 (in Russian).
9. Denisov V.P., Dragunov E.G. VVER reactor facilities for nuclear power plants. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2002, 480 p. (in Russian).
10. Babich A.Yu., Goryaev E.Yu., Grushkin A.N., Knyazev R.A., Matveyev M.V., Nikitin B.Yu., Novikov A.Yu., Petrov A.R., Ponomareva T.V., Ryzhov S.N., Saitov R.R., Timshina D.K., Chudinova V.A., Agafonova N.D. Choice of the optimal design of the steam generator for the VVER21200 unit: comparison of the characteristics of the steam generator in the 4 and 2 loops configurations. Collected papers «Science Week SPbPU. Materials of the Scientific Forum with International Participation». Saint Petersburg. Institute for Energy and Transport Systems Publ., 2015, pp. 123-125 (in Russian).
11. Lukasevich B.I., Trunov N.B., Dragunov Yu.G., Davidenko S.E. Steam generators of VVER reactor facilities for nuclear power plants. Moscow. Akademkniga Publ., 2004, 391 p. (in Russian).
12. Morozov V.B., Lyubarsky А.V., Minibaev R.F. Assessment of permissible time of an unit at power level for different configurations of safety systems. Collected papers for Хth International scientific-technical conference «Safety assurance at NPP with VVER type reactors». Podolsk. OKB Gidropress Publ., 2017 (in Russian).
13. Shumaylov G.P., Polunichev V.I., Gornostaev D.A. Systems of passive heat dissipation of nuclear power plants of new generation. Teploenergetika. 2005, no. 12, pp. 50-54 (in Russian).
14. Lityshev А.V., Pantyushin S.I., Aulova O.V., Gasparov D.L., Bukin N.V., Bykov М.А. Experience of development and design justification of Severe Accident Management Manual of NVNPP22 using SOKRAT code. Collected papers for Хth International scientific-technical conference «Safety assurance at NPP with VVER type reactors». Podolsk. OKB Gidropress Publ., 2017. Available at http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/mntk2017/autorun/article162-ru.htm (accessed 20.08.2017) (in Russian).
15. NP-095-15. Basic requirements imposed to PSA of a NPP Unit. Available at http://meganorm.ru/Index2/1/4293759/4293759565.htm (accessed 20.08.2017) (in Russian).
16. Baranova Yu.А., Slepov M.T. NPP-2006 with VVER-1200 – new approach to information display from technical diagnostics systems. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp.11-20 (in Russian).
17. RB-021-14 Basic recommendations to PSA Level 1 development for a NPP unit for initiating events stipulated by external natural and man2made impact. Available at http://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200112750 (accessed 20.08.2017) (in Russian).
18. RB-076-12. Basic recommendations to PSA Level 1 development for a NPP unit for initiating events stipulated by on2site fires and flooding. Available at http://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200132429 (accessed 20.08.2017) (in Russian).
19. RB-024-11. Provisions on basic recommendations to PSA Level 1 development for a NPP unit for internal initiating events for all operating plant conditions. Available at http://snipov.net/database/c_4023765195_doc_4293795463.html (accessed 20.08.2017) (in Russian).