+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="02"
file="pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-02.pdf"
first_page="22"
last_page="32"
udc="621.039"
title="Dynamic stability of the VVER-1200 power unit"
original_title="Динамическая устойчивость энергоблока с ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["GusevIN", "KazanskiyVR", "VitkovskyIL"]
tags=["dynamic stability", "tests", "reactor", "steam generator", "turbine generator", "control", "pump", "power", "pressure", "flow rate", "level"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.02"

+++

The paper discusses the results of critical experiments to study the dynamic stability of a power unit with the VVER-1200 reactor conducted as part of the pre-commissioning activities at the pilot operation stage of Novovoronezh NPP II’s unit No. 1.

The following dynamic tests were conducted:
– trip of one feedwater pump (PEN) with no standby PEN actuated at the power level of 100% Nnom, involving a detailed analysis of a variation in the process parameters of such mode and the process dynamics, and an assessment of the test results on a full-scale simulator;
– trip of one out of four reactor coolant pump sets (RCPS) in operation at the power level of 100% Nnom and a safety assessment for the reactor plant in terms of the core thermal reliability;
– turbine generator (TG) load shedding to the auxiliary level with assessments of the behavior of major reactor plant characteristics.

The paper presents recordings for transients and safety-related process parameters, and describes the operation of the unit components and essential controls in the course of the dynamic tests. A conclusion is made based on an analysis of the test results that the VVER-1200 unit has a high dynamic stability.

The results of the dynamic stability investigations for unit 1 of Novovoronezh II make it possible to provide a number of recommendations for further projects, including specifically the following:
– accelerated warning protection (AWP) should be used instead of reducing and limiting power for modes with disconnected feedwater electric pumps;
– generator-grid timing devices should be used for modes with the unit operating for auxiliary power supply;
– Russian-designed software and hardware tools should be fully switched over to for implementing both normal operation and safety control systems, since updating the protection and disabling algorithms used in the AREVA software and hardware package introduced at Novovoronezh II requires the developer authorization which involves substantial time and financial expenditures.

### References

1. Kazakov V.A., Zhudenkov V.V., Kazakov K.V., Povarov V.P., Vitkovskii I.L. Improving the transient stability of VVER-1000 reactor-based nuclear power plant units. Teploenergetika, 2014, v. 61, no. 1, pp. 47-53 (in Russian).
2. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov, A.M., Vasil’ev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kosourov, K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V. F. NPP with the reactor VVER51000. From the physical basics of operation to the evolution of the project. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010, 604 p. (In Russian).
3. Afrov A.M., Andrushechko S.A., Ukraintsev V.F., Vasil’ev B.Yu., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu. M., Kokosadze E.L., Ivanov E.A. VVER51000: the Physical bases of operation of, nuclear fuel safety. Moscow. Universitetskaya kniga, Logos Publ., 2006, 488 p. (in Russian).
4. Kalinushkin A.E., Kozlov V.V., Mitin I.V., Semchenkov Yu.M. Control System, Diagnostics and Control for Nuclear Reactor, High Power Pressurized Water Reactors. Atomnaya energiya. 2009, v. 106, iss. 1, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
5. Margulova T.Kh. Nuclear power plants. Textbook for Universities, 5th ed. Moscow. Izdat Publ., 1994, 288 p. (in Russian).
6. NP-001-15. General safety provisions for nuclear power plants. Moscow. The Federal Service for Ecological, Technological and Nuclear Supervision Publ., 2015, 74 p. (in Russian).
7. Krushelnitsky V.N., Topchiyan R.M. A preliminary report on safety justification. A General description of the nuclear power plant. Novoronezh NPP-2. Moscow. FGUP «Atomenergoproekt» Publ., 2007, 120 p. (in Russian).
8. Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Design, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. NS-R-1. IAEA, Vienna, 2003, 67 p.
9. EUR presentations at the WNU International Forum on harmonization of Reactor Design Requirements, Manchester (UK), September 1-4 2009. Available at http://www.europeanutilityrequirements.org/Portals/0/Documents/EUR%20Forum%20WNU.zip (accessed Jun 20 2017).
10. Shutikov A.V. Development and experience of plant operation at the increased power level. The prospects of further capacity increase up to 110 and 112%. Proc. of the VIIth International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economy of Atomic Energy». Moscow. «Kontsern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2010, pp. 5-6 (in Russian).
11. Samoilov O.B., Falkov A.A., Shipov D.L., Bogryakov V.G., Sorokin N.M., Dmitriev S.M. Thermohydraulic and hydrodynamic studies of fuel assembly characteristics alternative design of VVER-1000. VANT. Ser. Fizika yadernykh reaktorov. 2004, no. 2, pp. 47-55 (in Russian).
12. Malovik K.N., Nikishin V.V. Forecasting of a condition of the coolant of nuclear reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 1, pp. 48-53 (in Russian).
13. Aminov R.Z., Khrustalev V.A., Dubansky A.S., Osadchiy A.I. NPPs with VVER reactors: operating modes, characteristics, efficiency. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990, 264 p. (in Russian).
14. Baranova Yu.A., Slepov M.T. AES 2006 VVER-1200 – a new approach to display the cost information from the systems of technical diagnostics. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 11-20 (in Russian).