+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-03.pdf"
first_page="33"
last_page="44"
udc="621.039"
title="NPP operational reliability improvement based on the diversity principle"
original_title="Повышение надежности эксплуатации АЭС на основе реализации принципа разнообразия"
authors=["AndropovEV", "KoganIR", "PovarovVP", "PavlovLP"]
tags=["common cause failure, software", "control safety systems", "diverse protection system", "protection algorithms"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.03"

+++

Automated Process Control Systems (APCS) of the power units under construction must be protected from common cause failures due to software errors. Protection from common cause failures in accordance with GOST R-IEС 60880-2011 can only be ensured by applying the diversity principle.

In the APCS design of the Novovoronezh NPP II-1, software and hardware complexes are used both in normal operation systems and in safety systems. At the same time, the initiating part of the reactor emergency and preventive protection subsystems based on the TELEPERM XS hardware and software is not immune from failures caused by possible errors in the software.

To exclude common cause failures of the control safety systems, the project provides for additional measures that eliminate failures of the safety systems due to the software failure.

Consideration is given to the problem description, basic directions of the diversity principle implementation to reduce the probability of equipment failures, evaluation of reliability indicators in accordance with the SSTC NRS recommendations as well as the description of the diverse protection system (DPS) and its structure. The structure of the DPS algorithm for controlling actuators is exemplified by the steam generator protection. The interaction scheme of normal and diverse protection systems is analyzed.

Based on the experience of using the DPS at the NvNPP II, conclusions are drawn about the practical implementation of the reactor plant protection system and the need to analyze the consequences of joint operation of the initiating part of the safety management system in terms of technological parameters and DPS with possible algorithm adjustments.

### References

1. GOST R-IEC 60880-2011. Nuclear power plants – Instrumentation and control systems important to safety – Software aspects for computer-based systems performing category A functions. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2011, 147 p. (in Russian)
2. Alpeev A.S. Software’s reliability of the controlling systems and safety of nuclear power plants. Nadyozhnost’, 2015, no. 4, pp. 75-77 (in Russian).
3. Arkadov G. V., Dunayev V.G., Bozhenkov O.L. Russian NPPs PCSs today: through cooperation to progress. Yadernye izmeritel’no0informatsionnye tekhnologii. 2009, no. 2, pp. 4-21 (in Russian).
4. Expert conclusion of FBU NTTs YaRB DNP-5-2088/1-2012. Moscow. NTTs YaRB Publ., 2012, 4 p. (in Russian).
5. Shvyryaev Yu.V., Morozov V.B., Tokmachev G. V., Baykova E.V., Chulukhadze V.R., Fedulov M.V. Use of the probability analysis in case of reasons for safety of AES-2006 projected for a site of the Novovoronezh NPP. Atomnaya energiya. 2009, v. 106, no. 3, pp. 123-129 (in Russian).
6. Alpeev A.S. Diversity protection. Support of diversity principle in case of design of abnormal protection for nuclear power plants. Yadernaya i radiatsionnaya bezopsnost’. 2015, no. 2 (76), pp. 11-14 (in Russian).
7. NUREG/CR-7007 Diversity Strategies for Nuclear Power Plant Instrumentation and Control Sys-tems. ORNL/TM-2009/302. U.S. NRC, Washington, DC, 2010, 230 p.
8. GOST R ISO/IEC 9126-93. Information technology. Software product evaluation. Quality characteristics and guidelines for their use. Moscow. Izdatel’stvo Standartov Publ., 1994, – 10 p. (in Russian).
9. GOST R-IEC 62340-2011. «Nuclear power plants. Instrumentation and control systems important to safety. Requirements for coping with common cause failure». Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2012, 18 p. (in Russian).
10. NUREG/CR-5497. Common-Cause Failure Parameter Estimations, U.S. NRC, Washington, DC, October, 1998, 120 p.
11. Andropov E.V., Kogan I.R., Cooks of V. P., Pavlov L.P. Algorithmization of operating of the diversity system of complex protection for NPP’ units. Vestnik Voronezhskogo gosudarstvennogo tekhnicheskogo universiteta, 2015, v. 11, no. 5, pp. 51-58 (in Russian).
12. Kogan I.R., Poletykin A.G., Promyslov V.G., Zharko E.F. Evolution of the NPP PCS for VVER, problems, unresolved questions, new threats and the possible directions of development. Proc. of the XII All-Russian meeting on problems of control (VSPU-2014). Moscow. IPU RAN Publ., 2014. pp. 4200-4211 (in Russian).
13. Computer security at nuclear facilities reference manual. International Atomic Energy Agency Vienna, 2011. Available at http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1527_web.pdf (accessed Jun 26 2017).
14. NP 026-16. Requirements for Control Systems Significant for Nuclear Power Plants’ Safety. Moscow. Rospotrbnadzor Publ., 2016, 30 p. (in Russian).
15. NS-G-1.1. The Software of the Systems Important for Safety Executed on the Basis of the Computer Equipment for Nuclear Energetic Power Plants. Vienna, IAEA, 2000, 89 p.