+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="05"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/05.pdf"
first_page="55"
last_page="65"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Key results of pre commissioning activities for the emergency and scheduled cooldown system of the AES 2006 unit with the V 392M reactor plant"
original_title="Основные результаты пусконаладочных работ по системе аварийного и планового расхолаживания блока АЭС-2006 с РУ В-392М"
authors=["StatsuraDB", "VolnovAS", "ShkalenkovVN", "ZhirnovKV", "TopchiyanRM"]
tags=["redundancy", "combination of functions", "reliability", "safety case", "tests", "ejector", "emergency cooldown", "fuel cooling"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.05"

+++

The paper describes the combination of safety and normal operation functions adopted in the AES-2006 design, as illustrated by a two-channel structure of active safety systems, showing the major innovative solutions and their differences from earlier designs, such as
– use of a pump-ejector assembly in the primary circuit emergency and scheduled cooldown and spent fuel pool cooling system;
– the emergency and scheduled cooldown and spent fuel pool cooling system has been designed as two fully independent channels (each of the system’s channels consists of two legs, each channel leg having a capacity of 100%);
– the redundancy rate is 2 × 200%.

Differences in the emergency and scheduled cooldown systems are considered for the V-392M и V-320 designs. The fulfillment of the acceptance criteria has been shown based on test results, including additional tests performed in different modes during the commissioning of Novovoronezh NPP II’s unit 1 with the V-392M reactor plant. A description and a pattern are provided for the full-scale simulator tests to justify the long-term performance of the pump-ejector assembly scheduled for 2017, including the inspection of the water jet pump nozzle inner surface condition and the water jet pump durability tests followed by examination for the absence of damage and visible defects to the nozzle surface.

The overall reliability of safety systems has been improved as the result of the innovations. The successful durability tests of the emergency and scheduled cooldown system pump-ejector assembly have proved the reliability and efficiency of the water jet unit used for the first time in the NPP safety systems.

### References

1. NP 001-15. Federal rules and regulations in the field of nuclear energy use «General Safety Assurance Provisions for Nuclear Power Plants». Moscow. FBU NTC YaRB Publ., 2016, 56 p. (in Russian).
2. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasilyev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with a reactor of the VVER-1000 type. From the physical foundations of exploitation to the evolution of the project. Moscow. Logos Publ. 2010. 604 p. (in Russian).
3. Afrov A.M., Andrushechko S.A., Ukraintsev V.F., Vasiliev B.Yu., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kokosadze E.L., Ivanov E.A. VVER-1000: Physical basis of operation, nuclear fuel, security. Moscow. Logos Publ. 2006. 487 p. (in Russian).
4. NP-010-1. Federal rules and regulations in the field of nuclear energy use «Rules for Design and Operation of Localizing Safety Systems of NPPs». Moscow. 2016. Available at http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_196163/ (accessed 20.06.2017) (in Russian).
5. Sokolov E.Y., Singer N.M. Jet Machines. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 352 p. (in Russian).
6. Novovoronezh NPP. Project NPP-2006. Available at http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed 20.06.2017) (in Russian).
7. Morozov V.B., Lyubarsky A.V., Minibaev R.F. Estimating the permissible time of the block’s operation on the power for various configurations of security systems. Proc. of the Xth International Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPPs with VVER». Podolsk. OKB «Gidropress» Publ., 2017 (in Russian).
8. Pernik A.D. Problems of Cavitation. Leningrad. Sudostroenie Publ., 1966. 435 p. (in Russian).
9. Trubkin E.P., Karasev E.K., Vazinger V.V., Larionov N.P., Alayev N.I., Nikonov S.M. The results of the study of the erosion resistance of materials in high-speed water flows and a two-phase mixture of the flow-through part of the injectors. Teploenergetika. 2007, no. 2, pp. 9-12 (in Russian).
10. Lyamov B.F. Hydrojet Pumps and Installations. Leningrad. Mashinostroenie Publ. 1998. 256 p. (in Russian).
11. Pearsall I. Cavitation. Mills and Boon Limited. London, 1972. 93 p.
12. Knapp R.T., Daily J.W., Hammit F.G. Cavitation. McGraw-Hill. New York, 1970.
13. Gurliga V.A., Skalozubov V.I. Bubble Boiling Streams in Power Equipment of NPPs. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ. 1992. 432 p. (in Russian).
14. Skomorokhov A.O., Slepov M.T. Control of the reliability of information in the vibrodiagnostic system of the Novovoronezh NPP. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 1999, no. 1, pp. 56-65 (in Russian).
15. Aminov R.Z., Khrustalev V.A., Dukhovensky A.S., Osadchy A.I. NPP with VVER: Regimes, Characteristics, Efficiency. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990, 264 p. (in Russian).
16. Gorshkov A.M. Pumps. Moscow. Gosenergoizdat Publ. 1947. 188 p. (in Russian).
17. Yaremenko O.V. Testing of Pumps. Reference Manual. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1976. 114 p. (in Russian).