+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="06"
file="/pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-06.pdf"
first_page="66"
last_page="76"
udc="004: 621.039"
title="Development trends of modern automated process control systems at Novovoronezh NPP"
original_title="Тенденции развития АСУ ТП на Нововоронежской АЭС"
authors=["TerekhovDV", "SidorenkoEV", "DanilovАD"]
tags=["Automated Process Control System", "software and hardware complex", "broadcast storm", "cybersecurity"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.06"

+++

The evolution of automated process control systems at nuclear power plants from traditional automation means with hard-wire logic based on archaic means – arrow instruments, recorders, light indicators, keys for individual equipment control etc., up-to-date automated information and control systems based on high-level software and hardware. Characteristics of the features that affect the design decisions for the process control system, such as the continuity of processes, the variety of equipment and accessories, the complexity and heterogeneity of software and hardware, the centralization of information, and so on. It is shown that modern automated process control systems for nuclear power facilities should contain a upper level system. The general architecture of such a system is considered and its composition is presented on the example of the automated process control system for NVNPP-2 A detailed analysis of the problems of the functioning of this system, consisting in ineffective operation of the communication busbars due to avalanche-type information processes in the transmission of broadcast messages, which paralyzes the network and automated process control system in a whole. Priority measures aimed to improve stability of the automated process control system are proposed: automatic recovery of operability within a specified time, elimination of false operation of controllers and interlocks, visualization of information by parameters from safety panels and common display. The analysis of the issues of cybersecurity of the information subsystems of the automated process control system of nuclear power plants was carried out and a solution was proposed to increase the level here by duplicating and reserving data transmission channels.

### References

1. Mengazetdinov N.E., Byvaikov M.E., Zuenkov M.A. A set of works to establish the first control system of the upper level unit of the automated process control system for Bushehr NPP based on national information technologies. Moscow. IPU RAN Publ., 2013. 95 p. (in Russian).
2. Novovoronezh NPP-2. Design «AES-2». Available at http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed Sep 05 2017) (in Russian).
3. Krushelnitsky V.N.; Topchiyan R.M. Preliminary safety analysist report. General description of the nuclear power plant. Novovoronezh NPP-2 Power Unit No. 1. Moscow. FGUP «Atomenergoproekt» Publ., 2007 (in Rusian).
4. Shviryayev Yu.V., Morozov V.B., Tokmachev G.V. The rationale for the safety of the NPP-2006 design for NVNPP-2 site conditions by the methods of probabilistic safety analysis. Tyazhyoloe Mashinostroenie. 2009, no. 11, pp. 2-6 (in Russian).
5. Antipov S.I., Sivokon V.P., Butko A.B., Chernyaev A.N. Establishing of a competitiveautomated process control system for NPP of a new generation. Avtomatizatsiya v promyshlennosti. 2015, v. 11, pp. 36-40 (in Russian).
6. IAEA Publications. Available at http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/ (accessed Sep 05 2017).
7. European Utility Requirements (EUR). Available at http://www.europeanutilityrequirements.org/Welcome.aspx (accessed Sep 05 2017).
8. Tokmachev G.V. Approach to the use of PSA in the design of nuclear power plants with VVER type reactors of a new generation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2007, no. 3, pp. 44-53 (in Russian).
9. Danilov A.D., Golovnev V.N. Digital Control Systems. Voronezh. VGLTA Publ., 2007, 235 p. (in Russian).
10. Danilov A.D. Microprocessor elements and local automation devices. Voronezh. VGLTA Publ., 2005, 267 p. (in Russian).
11. Danilov A.D. Automation hardware. Voronezh. VGLTA Publ., 2007, 340 p. (in Russian).
12. Information and Computing System «Portal». General description of the system. Inv. No. 590 85 090.23512.014-F.PD.M. Moscow. JSC «VNIIAES» Publ., 2011.
13. Kurouz D., Ross K. Computer networks. System Administrator’s Desk Book. Moscow. Izdatel’stvo «E» Publ., 2016, 912 p. (in Russian).
14. Sergeev A.N. Fundamentals of local computer networks. St. Petersburg, Lan’ Publ., 2016, 186 p. (in Russian).
15. Olifer V., Olifer N. Computer networks. Principles, technologies, protocols. St. Petersburg. Piter Publ., 2016, 996 p. (in Russian).
16. Parshin S.A., Gorbachev Yu.E., Kozhanov Yu.A.. Cyberwar is a real threat to national security. Moscow. KRASAND Publ., 2011, 192 p. (in Russian).
17. NP 001-15. General Safety Assurance Provisions for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. FBU NTC YaRB Publ., 2016, 56 p. (in Russian).
18. NP 026-16. Requirements for Control Systems Significant for Nuclear Power Plants’ Safety. Moscow. Rospotrbnadzor Publ., 2016, 30 p. (in Russian).