+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="07"
file="/pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-07.pdf"
first_page="77"
last_page="87"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Comprehensive measurement of diagnostic parameters of equipment at the power unit № 1 of Novovoronezh NPP ii in the process of pilot operation"
original_title="Комплексные измерения диагностических параметров оборудования на блоке № 1 НВАЭС-2 в процессе опытно- промышленной эксплуатации"
authors=["FedorovAI", "SlepovMT"]
tags=["commissioning", "vibration control", "VVER-1200", "technical diagnostics", "vibration control system", "commissioning measurement", "portable analyzer", "acoustic standing waves", "natural frequency", "a function of the coherence", "phase characteristics", "the oscillations of the pendulum type"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.07"

+++

The use of a large number of measuring systems at the stage of commissioning of reactor facilities is a feature of the commissioning of nuclear power plants in our country and on domestic projects abroad unlike foreign experience, where professionals focus more on design rationale, and the commissioning of full-scale tests carried out in smaller amounts [13, 14]. Application during commissioning, the various measuring systems requires the involvement of a large number of staff from different organizations, often not coordinating among themselves work at various stages of the start-up process that ultimately leads to multiple duplication (mounting, installation, commissioning) as measurement channels and the received information, which is one of the sources of distortion, and a substantial increase in the cost of work. At the same time, most modern units are equipped with systems of technical diagnostics (STD) [1 – 3], consisting of a variety of measuring channels. The above problems have been partially solved with the commissioning of the new innovative generation Unit 3+ at the site of Novovoronezh NPP. In [4] is briefly affected by technical decisions, allowed to perform a series of joint measurements on the power Unit № 1 of Novovoronezh NPP II (Unit № 6 in old classification), which should stop in more detail with the aim of collecting experience and replicate it at other nuclear power plants. Distinguishing feature of the present study is the attempt to combine disparate local systems into a unified information system allowing use of the maximum number of standard channels simultaneously with dedicated measurement channels temporarily installed for the commissioning in order to obtain reliable and quality information about the status of the power units.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. System diagnosis of VVER. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2010. 391 p. (in Russian).
2. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Usanov A.I. Vibration and noise diagnostics of VVER. Under the editorship of A.A. Abagyan. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2004. 344 p. (in Russian).
3. GOST 20911-89. Technical diagnostics. Terms and definitions. Moscow. Publishing House of Standards, 1990. 13 p. (in Russian).
4. Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T., Khairetdinov V.U. Experience of carrying out complex measurements with the use of different systems at different stages of the start-up of the VVER-1200. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 4, pp. 44-54. (in Russian).
5. Baranova A.Yu., Slepov M.T. AES 2006 VVER-1200 is a new approach to displaying information from the systems of technical diagnostics. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 11-20 (in Russian).
6. Malyshev R.Y., Khairetdinov V.U. Peculiarities of control of the thermomechanical loading of reactor plant equipment during commissioning of power unit No. 4 of Kalinin NPP. The materials of the conference «Safety Assurance of NPP with WWER», OKB «Gidropress», Podolsk, May 28-31 2013 (in Russian).
7. Sistema tehnicheskogo diagnostirovaniya glavnyh tsyrkulyatsionnyh nasosnyh agregatov STD GTsNA)1391 [The system of technical diagnostics of the main circulation pumps units STD RCP-1391]. Available at: http://www.all-pribors.ru/opisanie/56440-14-std-gtsna-1391-60256 (accessed: 05 Apr. 2016) (in Russian).
8. Protocol No. 9/04-03-02/24-PR meeting on «Diagnosis of mechanical equipment and reactor installations of nuclear power plants.» Moscow. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom», 28.12.2015 (in Russian).
9. Sergienko A.B. Digital Signal Processing. Saint Petersburg. Peter Publ., 2003. 604 p. (in Russian).
10. Mozgalevsky A.V, Parkhomenko P.P., Soghomonyan E.S. Tehnicheskaya diagnostika: Spravochnik [Technical diagnostics: Reference book]. Vol. 9: Reliability and efficiency in technique. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1987. 240 p. (in Russian).
11. Parkhomenko P.P., Sogomonyan E.S. Basics of technical diagnostics. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981. 460 p. (in Russian).
12. Skomorohov А.О., Slepov M.T. Pattern recognition in APL with application to reactor diagnostics. APL Quote Quad. 2000, v. 29, no. 3, pp. 164-172.
13. Thie J.Reactor Noise. New York, 1963.
14. Advances in safety related diagnostics and early failure detection systems: Report of a technical committee meeting organized by the IAEA and held in Vienna, IAEA-J4-TC698, Nov. 20-24, 1995.
15. Albrecht R., Seifritz W. The Information in Neutron Fluctuations. Nuclear Science and Engineering, 1970, v. 41, pp. 417-420.
16. Thie J.A. Reactor noise monitoring for malfunctions. Reactor Technology. 1971, v. 14, no. 4, pp. 354-365.
17. Seifritz W., Stegemann D. Reactor noise analysis. Atomic Energy Review. 1971, v. 9, no. 1, pp. 129-135.
18. Uhric R.E. Noise analysis in power reactor. Electrical World. 1973, v. 180, no. 11, pp. 44-56.
19. Williams M.M.R. Random Processes in Nuclear Reactors. Pergamon Press. Ltd. Oxford England. 1974.
20. Saito K.On the theory of power reactor noise (I, II, III). Ann. of Nucl. Sci. and Eng., 1974, v. 1, pp. 3-253.
21. Saito K. Source papers in reactor noise. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 1979, v. 3, pp. 157-168.
22. Bernard P., Brillon A., Carre J.C. Neutron noise measurements of PWR’s. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 1977, v. 1, pp. 333-346.