+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/08.pdf"
first_page="88"
last_page="97"
udc="621.039.564"
title="Testing of the ICMS input data diagnostic system at unit № 1 of Novovoronezh NPP II"
original_title="Опробование системы диагностики входной информации СВРК на энергоблоке №1 Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["SemenikhinAV", "SauninYuV", "ZhukMM"]
tags=["in-core monitoring system", "measuring monitoring channels", "diagnostic system", "invalid readings"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.08"

+++

A real-time input data diagnostic system of the in-core monitoring system (ICMS) was tested for the first time during the commissioning of Unit № 1 at Novovoronezh NPP II. The purpose of the diagnostic systems is to support continuous ICMS input data validity control in connection with the fact that new and upgraded ICMS designs include the performance of safety functions based on local in-core parameters. Tasks are formulated to be solved in the development of the ICMS input data diagnostic system, the structure of the developed system is shown, and the key information on the system operation is provided.

There were developed algorithms to define main operating mode of reactor plant and it stationary state for the possibility of functioning in automatic regime. Techniques of estimating the reliability of monitoring channels readings used in diagnose system have been repeatedly verified at ICMS physical tests during commissioning and operation of VVER-1000 power units of different projects.

Major system testing results are given, which demonstrate the system to be capable to detect in real time the measuring monitoring channels with invalid readings and to present respective diagnostic data. These results have confirmed that the system is capable to define the measuring monitoring channels with doubtful readings and to give the corresponding diagnostic information. The fulfilled testing has shown, that the developed system can be recommended as project system. It will allow to raising reliability of functioning ICMS at the expense of automation of some maintenance procedures.

### References

1. Bragin V.А., Batenin I.V., Golovanov M.N., Kuzhil A.S., Levin G.L., Mitin V.I., Pavlyi I.Yu. Sistemy vnutrireaktornogo kontrolya AES s reaktorami VVER [In-core monitoring systems of NPP with WWER]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987. 128 p. (in Russian).
2. Kalinushkin A.E., Kozlov V.V., Mitin V.I., Semchenkov Yu.M. Sistema kontrolya, diagnostiki i upravleniya dlya yadernyh energeticheskih ustanovok bol’shoj moschnosti [Monitoring, diagnostics and control system for large-capacity nuclear power facilities with water moderated and cooled reactors]. Atomnaya Energiya, 2009, v. 106, no.1, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
3. Obschiepolozheniya obespecheniya bezopasnosti atomnyh stantsyj (NP-001-15) [General provisions of the nuclear power plants safety maintenance]. Federal’naya sluzhba po ekologicheskomu, tehnologicheskomu i atomnomu nadzory. Moscow, 2015, 78 p. (in Russian).
4. Saunin Yu.V., Ryasnyj S.I. Kompleksnye ispytaniya sistem vnutrireaktornogo kontrolya [Full-scale tests of in-core monitoring systems]. VANT. Ser. Obecpechenie bezopasnosti AES, 2011, v. 29, pp. 12-18. (in Russian).
5. Saunin Yu.V. Razrabotka metodik kompleksnyh ispytanij sistem vnutrireaktornogo kontrolya VVER: Avtoref. diss. kand. teh. nauk. [Techniques developing of the VVER in-core monitoring systems full-scale tests]. Podolsk, EDO «Gidropress», 2010. 30 p. (in Russian).
6. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series. No.N--T-1.1. On(line monitoring for improving performance of Nuclear Power Plants. Part 1: Instrument channel monitoring. – IAEA, Vienna, 2008, 122 p.
7. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series. No. NP-T-1.2. On(line monitoring for improving performance of Nuclear Power Plants. Part 2: Process and component condition monitoring and diagnostics. IAEA, Vienna, 2008. 82 p.
8. Hashemian H.M. Maintenance of process instrumentation in nuclear power plants. Springler Verlag, 2006. 308 p.
9. Hashemian H.M. The state of the art in nuclear power plant instrumentation. International journal of nuclear energy science and technology . 2009, v. 4, iss.4, pp. 350-354.
10. Hines J.W., Davis E. Lessons learned from the U.S. nuclear power plant on-line monitoring programs. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2005, v. 46, iss. 3-4, pp. 176-189.
11. Ma J., Jiang J. Applications of fault detection and diagnosis methods in nuclear power plants: A review. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2011, v. 53, iss. 3, pp. 255-266.
12. Alyev R.V. Raspoznovanie sostoyaniya aktivnoj zony i analiz dostovernosti informatsii sistemy vnutrireaktonogo kontrolya pri ekspluatatsyi toplivnyh zagruzok VVER(1000. Avtoref. diss. kand. tekh. nauk. [Recognition of a core state and the analysis of ICMS information reliability at operation of VVER-1000 fuel loadings]. Obninsk, 2013. 22 p. (in Russian).
13. Saunin Yu.V., Dobrotvorskij А.N., Semenihin А.V. Razrabotka i primenenie spetsializirovannogo programmnogo obespecheniya pri provedenii kompleksnyh ispytanij sistemy vnutrireaktornogo kontrolya reaktorov VVER [Developing and application of the specialised software for full-scale tests of VVER ICMS]. Tyazhyoloe mashinostroenie. 2008, no. 11, pp. 18-22 (in Russian).
14. Saunin Yu.V., Dobrotvorskij А.N., Semenihin А.V. Spetsializirovannoe programmnoe obespechenie dlya provedeniya kompleksnyh ispytanij sistemy vnutrireaktornogo kontrolya reaktorov VVER [The specialised software for full-scale tests of VVER in-core monitoring systems]. Sbornik tezisov dokladov VI Mezhdunar. nauchn.(tehnich. konf. «Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES s VVER» [Abstracts of 6-th Int. Conf. «Safety assurance of NPP with WWER»]. Podolsk, 2009, EDO «Gidropress», p. 105 (in Russian).
15. Hashemian H.M. Integrated online condition monitoring system for nuclear power plants. Kerntechnik. 2010, v. 75. no. 5, pp. 231-242.
16. Kim H., Na M.G., Heo G. Application of monitoring, diagnosis and prognosis in thermal performance analysis for nuclear power plants. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2014, v. 46, iss. 6, pp. 737-752.