+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="09"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/09.pdf"
first_page="98"
last_page="107"
udc="681.513.2"
title="A new generation information controlling system for refueling machine"
original_title="Информационно-управляющая система машины перегрузочной нового поколения"
authors=["KorobkinVV", "PovarovVP"]
tags=["information controlling system", "nuclear plant", "functional safety", "nuclear fuel", "refueling machine", "decentralization of control functions", "single failure", "human factor"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.09"

+++

Largely, the development of the new fuel handling and refueling complex at unit № 1 of Novovoronezh NPP II is specific in the thorough integration of the information controlling system (ICS) and the refueling machine (RM) electrical equipment package into a single complex. The structure of the multilevel multiprocessor and multinetwork ICS provides for a high fail and functional safety and meets the single failure principle even during operation in a single channel mode. The RM control during refueling involves the human operator who is supported by an intellectual interface. The operator decides on particular control actions for the RM and the complex as the whole, monitors the control process and makes decisions on prevention of abnormal and emergency situations.

New information technologies make it possible to use a combination of modern means and methods of collecting information to obtain new quality information about the state of an objects or process, algorithms for processing this information, and making decisions on managing the RM on this basis.

Essentially, the ICS is a distributed system which implements the entire control cycle and contains information, processing and controlling portions. The communication devices in each portion are responsible for the exchange of data among components through a complete graph or via a shared bus.

The development result is the RM ICS of a new generation which differs from its current counterparts in innovative procedural, algorithm, hardware/software and process design solutions leading to a shorter time and increased safety of nuclear fuel handling operations at a VVER type reactor. Simultaneously, the RM ICS introduction improves the unit’s capacity factor by about 1.66% which ensures the output and supply to consumers of extra electricity.

### References

1. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasil’yev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kososurov K.B., Semchenkov YU.M., Ukraintsev V.F. AES s reaktorom tipa VVER. Ot fizicheskikh osnov ekspluatatsii do evolyutsii proyekta [NPP with a reactor of the VVER type. From the physical foundations of exploitation to the evolution of the project]. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010. 603 p. (in Russian).
2. Kalyayev I.A., Korobkin V.V., Bayuklin V.F., Shkarovskiy A.N. Povysheniye bezopasnosti AES za schet vnedreniya novykh tekhnologiy. Atomnyye elektricheskiye stantsii. Dvadtsat’ let posle avarii na Chernobyl’skoy AES. [Increase the safety of nuclear power plants through the introduction of new technologies. Nuclear power plants. Twenty years after the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant.]. Moscow. Kontsern «Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2006, pp. 246-250 (in Russian).
3. Kalyayev I.A., Korobkin V.V., Kukharenko A.P., Makeyev V.V., Povarov V.P., Rumyantsev K.Ye. Innovatsionnyye razrabotki YUNTS RAN v oblasti sozdaniya sistem upravleniya dlya atomnoy energetiki [Innovative developments of the UNIC RAS in the field of creation of control systems for nuclear power]. Innovatsii. 2006, no. 10(97), pp. 65-68 (in Russian).
4. Avdeyev A.A., Kobelev A.M., Korobkin V.V., Zhil’nikov D.V., Yefremov S.M., Pinchuk M.E., Marchenko S.A. Mashiny peregruzki yadernogo topliva novogo pokoleniya dlya energoblokov proyekta AES-2006 s VVER 1200 [New generation nuclear fuel transfer machines for power units of NPP-2006 project with WWER-1200]. Integral. 2010, no. 51, pp. 28-33 (in Russian).
5. Makarov N.N. Sistemy obespecheniya bezopasnosti funktsionirovaniya bortovogo ergaticheskogo kompleksa: teoriya, proyektirovaniye, primeneniye [Systems to ensure the safety of the on-board ergatic complex: theory, design, application]. Moscow. Mashinostroyeniye-Polyot Publ., 2009. 760 p. (in Russian).
6. Sonami Arun K. Simplified phasedmission system analysis for system with independent component repairs. NASA. March 1996.
7. NP-001-15. Obshchiye polozheniya obespecheniya bezopasnosti atomnykh stantsiy. Federal’nyye normy i pravila v oblasti ispol’zovaniya atomnoy energii [General provisions for ensuring the safety of nuclear power plants. Federal norms and rules in the field of the use of atomic energy]. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Rossiyskoy Federatsii Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
8. Ostreykovskiy V.A., Shvyryayev Yu.V. Bezopasnost’ atomnykh stantsiy. Veroyatnostnyy analiz [Safety of nuclear power plants. Probabilistic analysis]. Moscow. Fizmalit Publ., 2008. 352 p. (in Russian).
9. Fedosovskiy M.Ye., Fokin G.A., Gumenyuk V.I. Veroyatnostnyy analiz bezopasnosti trans-portno-tekhnologicheskogo oborudovaniya peregruzki yadernogo topliva [Probabilistic analysis of the safety of transport equipment for nuclear fuel transhipment]. Nauchno7tekhnicheskiye vedomosti SPbGPU. 2009, no. 2 (78). pp. 98-102 (in Russian).
10. Kalyayev I.A., Korobkin V.V., Mel’nik E.V., Khisamutdinov M.V. Metody i sredstva povysheniya bezopasnosti i sokrashcheniya vremeni operatsiy s yadernym toplivom na AES s reaktorom tipa VVER-1000 [Methods and means to improve safety and reduce the time of operations with nuclear fuel at nuclear power plants with a reactor of the VVER-1000 type]. Rostov-na-Donu. Yuzhnyj federal’nyj universit Publ., 2014. 208 p. (in Russian).
11. NP-026-16. Trebovaniya k upravlyayushchim sistemam, vazhnym dlya bezopasnosti atomnykh stantsiy. Federal’nyye normy i pravila v oblasti ispol’zovaniya atomnoy energii [Requirements for control systems that are important for the safety of nuclear power plants. Federal norms and rules in the field of the use of atomic energy]. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Rossiyskoy Federatsii Publ., 2016. (in Russian).
12. Chelovecheskiy faktor v upravlenii. Pod red. N.A. Abramovoy, K.S. Ginsberga, D.A. Novikova [The human factor in management. Ed. Abramova N.A., Ginsberg K.S., Novikov D.A.]. Moscow. KomKniga Publ., 2006. 496 p. (in Russian).
13. Korobkin V.V., Sesekin O.L., Tashlykov A.N., Chentsov A.G. Metody marshrutizatsii i ikh prilozheniya v zadachakh povysheniya bezopasnosti i effektivnosti ekspluatatsii atomnykh stantsiy. [Routing methods and their applications in the tasks of increasing the safety and efficiency of operation of nuclear power plants]. Moscow. Novyye Tekhnologii Publ., 2012. 233 p. (in Russian).
14. Korneyev B.B. Arkhitektura vychislitel’nykh sistem s programmiruyemoy strukturoy [The architecture of computer systems with a programmable structure]. Novosibirsk. Nauka Publ., 1985 (in Russian).
15. Korobkin V.V., Serogodskiy A.I., Bluishvili I.V., Dubovik A.A. Programmnyy kompleks upravlyayushchey sistemy mashiny peregruzochnoy [The software complex of the control system of the transshipment machine]. Patent RF. No. 2015612308, 2015. (in Russian).