+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="10"
file="pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-10.pdf"
first_page="108"
last_page="120"
udc="621.039-78"
title="Neutron flux monitoring equipment in the design of Novovoronezh NPP-2"
original_title="Аппаратура контроля нейтронного потока в проекте Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["SergeevIА", "GorbaevVA", "TerekhovDV"]
tags=["reactor unit", "safety", "NFME", "neutron flux", "reactor power", "detection of neutron flux density", "measuring channel", "power readings correction"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.10"

+++

A new generation of neutron flux monitoring equipment (NFME) has been developed for the use in the 3+ generation reactor system of the AES-2006 project. This equipment is a part of control and protection system at the power units of Novovoronezh NPP-2. The following technical improvements were implemented: the four-channel two-set system structure, the newest software algorithms. These improvements provide better metrology, hardware security and diagnosability, upgraded man-machine interface. All this provides better safety, as reliability, diagnosability, serviceability, and metrology features are enhanced.

The new NFME development and implementation is based on the following principles: compliance with the requirements and recommendations of modern Russian and international norms and technical regulations, experience of creation and operation of similar systems, comprehensive verification and validation, compliance with requirements for the system integration into the automated process control system project for the new power generation units, high level of quality and reliability, high safety performance principles.

The article describes the basic principles of NFME building, innovative and conventional solutions used for the equipment design; deals with issues of putting NFME into operations (taking into account the specific features of the power unit design, customized equipment placement, special requirements for equipment and communication lines noise immunity, approved conformity of metrological specification, equipment launch settings). The article gives analytical results of the NFME operation during the main stages of physical and power start-up (fuel loading, critical state output and minimum controlled power level, during physical trials and dynamic tests).

During the start-up operations and pilot operation, the NFME was confirmed to comply with the requirements of the project, regulatory documents, accuracy features were quite satisfactory and serviceability was confirmed.

### References

1. NP-082-07. Federal rules and regulations in the field of nuclear energy use «Nuclear Safety Rules for Nuclear Power Plants». Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2007, 26 p. (in Russian).
2. SFUA.021 TZ. Private technical requirements for designing the devices of neutron flux control NFME-01 (AKNP-01). Moscow. JSC «VNIIAES» Publ., 2011 (in Russian).
3. Dunaev V.G., Bozhenkov O.L. The creation of APCS for NPPs in 2006. Paper presented at the International forum «ATOMEXPO-2009». Moscow, 2009 (in Russian).
4. GOST 27445-87 (ST SEV 6633-89) Neutron flux monitoring systems for control and protection of nuclear reactors. General technical requirements (with modification №1). Moscow. Izdatel’stvo standartov Publ., 1988, 18 p. (in Russian).
5. IEC 61513:2011. Nuclear power plants. Instrumentation and control important to safety. General requirements for systems. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2012, 78 p. (in Russian).
6. IEC 60880:2006 Nuclear power plants. Instrumentation and control systems important to safety. Software aspects for computer-based systems performing category A functions. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2011, 147 p. (in Russian).
7. IEC62138:2004. Nuclear power plants. Instrumentation and control important for safety. Software aspects for computer-based systems performing category B or C functions. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2011, 77 p. (in Russian).
8. IEC 60987:2013. Nuclear power plants. Instrumentation and control important to safety. Hardware design requirements for computer-based systems. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2013, 78 p. (in Russian).
9. IEC 62340:2007. Nuclear power plants. Instrumentation and control systems important to safety. Requirements for coping with common cause failure (CCF). Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2011, 50 p. (in Russian).
10. Baturin D.M., Budnikova O.A., Vygovskij S.B., Galkin I.V., Zimin V.G., Kraushkin U.A., Korikovsky K.P., Misherin S.A., Osadchiy M.A., Semenov A.A., Strashnykh V.P., Tikhonov N.V., Chernov E.V., Chernakov V.A., Bay V.F., Bogachek L.N., Lupishko A.A., Chapaev V.M. The program complex PROSTOR (version 1). Application to certification passport №182 ot 28.10.2004 (in Russian).
11. SemenovA.A., DruzhaevA.A., Sergeev I.A., Schukin N.V., Strikovskij V.I. The algorithm adjust the power readings for channels of neutron flux monitoring. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2013, v. 4, no. 8, pp. 758-764 (in Russian).
12. SFUA.501319.007 TU. The monitoring of neutron flux NFME#01 (AKNP#01). Specifications. Moscow. JSC «SKU-Atom» Publ., 2010, 8 p. (in Russian).
13. Specific Safety Guide No. SSG-39. Design of Instrumentation and Control Systems for Nuclear Power Plants, IAEA 2016. Available at http://regelwerk.grs.de/sites/default/files/cc/dokumente/SSG-39.pdf (accessed May 15 2017).
14. Sergeev I.A. Experience in the implementation of NFME for projects NPP#2006 6 power unit of Novovoronezh NPP. Report on the branch scientific-technical conference, 2017. Availabe at http://www.sniip.ru/assets/images/resources/4174/%D0%A1%D0%9A%D0%A3-%D0%90%D1%82%D0%BE%D0%BC%20-%20%D0%9E%D0%BF%D1%8B%D1%82%20%D1%80%D0%B5%D0%B0%D0%BB%D0%B8%D0%B7%D0%B0%D1%86%D0%B8%D0%B8%20%D0%90%D0%9A%D0%9D%D0%9F%20%D0%B4%D0%BB%D1%8F%20%D0%BF%D1%80%D0%BE%D0%B5%D0%BA%D1%82%D0%B0%20%D0%90%D0%AD%D0%A1-2006.pdf (accessed Jun 20 2017) (in Russian).
15. IzІyurov A.S., Luzhnov A.M. The use of out#of#pile detectors to control the distribution of energy according to the height of the reactor core PWR. Moscow. Informenergo Publ., 1985, 28 p. (in Russian).