+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/11.pdf"
first_page="121"
last_page="130"
udc="621.039"
title="Specifics of initial fuel charge of the innovative power unit of AES-2006 design"
original_title="Особенности первой загрузки ядерного топлива инновационного энергоблока по проекту АЭС-2006"
authors=["PrytkovAN", "TereshchenkoAB", "GolubevEI", "BoevIA"]
tags=["AES-2006", "VVER-1200", "first criticality", "reactor core", "nuclear fuel", "dummy fuel assembly"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.11"

+++

Before initiating the «first criticality» stage of Novovoronezh NPP-II Unit No. 1 commissioning, we analyzed the initial fuel charge experience for VVER-type reactors. The analysis exposed number of negative factors, which may develop during the aforementioned stage. With the said issues and new unit start-up experience in mind, the traditional fuel charge method was refined for ensuring environmental durability (to external and internal impact of natural and man-made character) of partially fueled reactor core during an initial fuel charge. Simultaneous loading of fuel and dummy assemblies was used for the first time for VVER. A set of measures was developed to provide dummy assemblies’ compatibility with fuel assemblies. Special measures were taken to ensure safe initial fuel charge with fuel and dummy assemblies simultaneously. Monitoring of shape change, flushing and certification of dummy fuel assemblies to ensure safe first fuel loading with simultaneous loading of fuel and dummy assemblies in the reactor were applied.

Additional equipment was installed for controlling reactor core coolant level, as well as boric acid concentration during an initial fuel charge at VVER-1200 reactor, because low level and lack of coolant circulation in the reactor does not allow using routine monitoring systems. Effect of calculation parameters and high detectors sensitivity on neutron flux monitoring during fuel charge was defined.

### References

1. Kalyayev I.A, Korobkin V.V, Melnik E.V, Khisamutdinov M.V Methods and means to improve safety and reduce the time of operations with nuclear fuel at NPPs with a VVER-1000 reactor. Southern Federal University. Rostov-on-Don. Southern Federal University Publ., 2014, 207 p. (in Russian).
2. Fedosovsky M.E, Fokin G.A, Gumenyuk V.I.. Probabilistic analysis of safety of transport-technological equipment for nuclear fuel reloading. Nauchno-tekhnicheskie vedomosti SPbSPU, 2009, no. 2 (78), pp. 98-102 (in Russian).
3. Kalyaev I.A, Korobkin V.V, Baiklin V.F, Shkarovsky A.N. Improving the safety of nuclear power plants through the introduction of new technologies. Nuclear power plants. Twenty years after the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Moscow. Concern «Rosenergoatom», 2006, p. 246-250 (in Russian).
4. Andrushechko S.A, Afrov A.M, Vasilyev B.Y., Generalov V.N, Kososurov K.B, Semchenkov Y.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with a reactor of the VVER type. From the physical basics of exploitation to the evolution of the project. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010, 603 p. (in Russian).
5. Novovoronezh NPP. NPP-2006 Design. Available at http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed 20.06.2017).
6. NP 001-15. Federal rules and regulations in the field of nuclear energy use «General Safety Assurance Provisions for Nuclear Power Plants». Moscow. FBU NTC YaRB Publ., 2016, 56 p. (in Russian).
7. NP-082-07. Federal rules and regulations in the field of nuclear energy use «Nuclear Safety Rules for Nuclear Power Plants». Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2007, 26 p. (in Russian).
8. Semchenkov Y.M., Kosourov K.B., Gorbaev V.A., Osadchii A.I., Tebin V.V., Borisenkov A.E., Bezborodov A.N., Kalugin A.V., Ivanov D.T., Gurina G.V. Report «Measuring reactor core multiplication factor at different fuel charge levels, coolant density, fuel assembly impact, failures during the first stage of initial fuel charge and different boric acid concentrations, local dilutions, charge failures at fully charged reactor core of Novovoronezh-2 Unit 1». Inv. № 110.10-55/1-76-415. Moscow. National Research Centre «Kurchatov Institute», 2015 (in Russian).
9. NP-064-05. Federal rules and regulations in the field of the use of atomic energy use «Accounting for external impacts of natural and technogenic origin on the objects of use of atomic energy». Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2005, 63 p. (in Russian).
10. Semchenkov Y.M., Kosourov K.B., Gorbaev V.A., Osadchiy A.I., Tebin V.V., Borisenkov A.E., Bezborodov A.N., Kalugin A.V., Gurina G.V. Technical information «Measuring reactor core multiplication factor, partially fuelled with fuel assemblies and densified with dummy assemblies, under changing coolant density». Inv. № 110.10-55/1-1-116. Moscow. National Research Centre «Kurchatov Institute», 2015 (in Russian).
11. Avdeev A.A., Kobelev A.M., Korobkin V.V., Zhilnikov D.V., Efremov S.M., Pinchuk M.E., Marchenko S.A. New generation nuclear fuel transfer machines for power units of NPP-2006 project with VVER-1200. Integral. 2010, no. 1 (51), pp. 28-33 (in Russian).
12. Emelyanov I.Y., Efanov A.I., Konstantinov L.V. Scientific and technical fundamentals of managing nuclear reactors. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981, 360 p. (in Russian).