+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="12"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/12.pdf"
first_page="131"
last_page="141"
udc="621.313.322-81"
title="Sustainability of the energy system at the use of the transport system of excitation of TG unit no. 1 at Novovoronezh NPP II with a regulator of strong action"
original_title="Устойчивость энергосистемы при использовании бесщеточной системы возбуждения турбогенератора энергоблока № 1 НВАЭС-2 с регулятором сильного действия"
authors=["ShiryaevDA", "ZiminAI"]
tags=["Novovoronezh NPP", "power unit", "sustainability", "excitation system", "excitation regulator", "relay protection"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.12"

+++

The article considers and analyzes the factors influencing the stable operation of the turbogenerator (TG) of the power unit No. 1 of the NVNPP-2 and the stability of the energy system as a whole.

As a system of excitation of TG at nuclear power plants, brushless diode systems are used that are independent and do not have contact rings and brush-and-pinion devices, which significantly increases the service life and reliability of the unit. there is no mechanical or electrical wear of these elements. The system of excitement of TG is one of the main elements of a power supply system ensuring her reliable functioning.

For stable operation of the power system, the TG excitation system and its control system must provide nominal values of excitation voltage and current, as well as the necessary speed, i.e. high rate of increase and removal of excitement. In stability theory, two categories of stability are considered for power systems. The first, static stability, is understood as the ability of the system to restore the initial operating mode independently with a small perturbation. The second, dynamic stability is the ability of the power system to return to the steady state after significant disturbances (short circuits, disconnection of generators, lines) without transition to an asynchronous mode.

For setup of parameters of regulators of excitation AVR-3MT a large number of tests is carried out. On real model of a power supply system in ОАО « NTC EEC » single-phase and two-phase short circuits on the earth near buses on all departing associations of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 were modeled. During commissioning on NVNPP-2 the TG-1 passed all tests at different power levels. The test result is a choice of optimum coefficients for the excitation regulator.

### References

1. Gurevich Yu.E., Libova L.E., Okin A.A. Calculations of stability and antiabnormal automatic equipment in power supply systems. – M.: Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990, 390 p. (in Russian).
2. Venikov V. A. Transient electromechanical phenomena in electrical systems. Moscow. Vysshaya shkola Publ., 1985, 536 p. (in Russian).
3. Esipovich A.H., Zekkel A. S. Calculation of oscillatory stability and optimization of the ARV settings of generators. In Proc. of the Federation of Energetic and Electrotechnical Societies. St. Petersburg, 1992 (in Russian).
4. Esipovich A.H., Zekkel A. S. A program complex of calculation of oscillatory stability and choice of setup of regulators of excitation. Elektricheskie stantsii. 1995, no. 12, 1995 (in Russian).
5. Gerasimov A. S., Esipovich A.H., Zekkel A. S. Use of digital models of a power supply system for setup of regulators of excitation of generators. Proc. of the International scientific and technical conference «The modern systems of excitation for new construction and reconstruction of power stations. Experience of adjustment and maintenance of systems of excitation of new generation». St. Petersburg, 2004 (in Russian).
6. Gerasimov A. S., Esipovich A.H., Zekkel A. S. The modern software of the analysis of stability of electrical power systems. Elektricheskie stantsii, 2005, no. 12 (in Russian).
7. Gushchina T.A., Gerasimov A. S., Esipovich A.H. Experience of use digital-analogo-physical complex for support of system reliability of UES of Russia. Elektricheskie stantsii, 2005, no. 12 (in Russian).
8. The protocol of setup, tests and adjustment of regulators of excitation AVR-3MT for turbo generators TG-1 and TG-2 of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 on TsAFK JSC «NTTs EES», Dec 25 2015 (in Russian).
9. JSC «NTTs EES» Standard. Requirements to the systems of excitation and automaticregulators of excitation of the strong operation of the synchronous generators, STO 59012820.29.160.20.001-2012 (in Russian).
10. JSC «NTTs EES» Report. A choice of tuning properties of regulators of excitation for turbo generators TG-1, TG-2 at the Novovoronezh NPP-2 in OES Centre digital models. Inv. No. 1092-KT. St. Petersburg. JSC «NTTs EES» Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
11. JSC «NTTs EES» Report. Results of check of tuning properties of the regulator of excitation AVR-2 for turbogenerator TG-12 at the power unit No. 4 of the Novovoronezh NPP in OES Centre scheme on digital-analogo-physical complex. Inv. No. 790-KT. St. Petersburg. JSC «NTTs EES» Publ., 2013 (in Russian).
12. JSC «NTTs EES» Report. Results of check of tuning properties of the regulator of excitation AVR-3M for turbogenerators of units No. 3 and No. 4 of the Rostov NPP in OES South scheme on a digital-analogo-physical complex. Inv. No. 965-KT. St. Petersburg. JSC «NTTs EES» Publ., 2014 (in Russian).
13. Kachur S.A., Shakhova of N.V. System of diagnosing of a status of a turbogenerator on the basis of Petri nets. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 1, pp. 13-20 (inRussian).
14. SО 153-34.20.576-2003. Methodical Guidelines for Power Systems Stability. Moscow. NTs ENAS Publ., 2005, 16 p. (in Russian).
15. Bakshi U.A., Bakshi V.U. Electrical Machines – I. Pune (India). Technical Publications Publ., 2009, 532 p.