+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="13"
file="pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-13.pdf"
first_page="142"
last_page="150"
udc="621.311.25"
title="Results of a preoperational inspection at unit №1 of Novovoronezh NPP II"
original_title="Результаты предэксплуатационного контроля на энергоблоке № 1 Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["UrazovOV"]
tags=["preoperational inspection", "ultrasonic testing", "ultrasonic testing technology", "eddy-current testing", "reactor vessel", "steam generator"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.13"

+++

A preoperational inspection for the state of the parent metal and welded joints in components and pipelines at unit № 1 of Novovoronezh NPP II is discussed. Peculiarities involved in the inspection of the reactor vessel welded joints facing the anticorrosive plating and the steam generator heatexchange tubes using innovative test systems and techniques are considered.

To inspect the reactor vessel, «Computational and Engineering Case Study RTO-KR-UZA-15-[1] was developed specifically, based on which the VVER-1200 reactor vessel welded joints were inspected, using a manual ultrasonic technique, through the anticorrosive plating.

A technology [2], developed by JSC «Center for Eddy-Current Testing «Politest» and by the Scientific and Technical Center for Emergency Engineering Operations at Nuclear Power Plants, a branch of JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom», and used for the first time at a Russian NPPs at the stage of preoperational incoming inspection for the state of the parent metal and welded joints in components and pipelines at unit № 1 of Novovoronezh NPP II using «Politest-PG», an innovative system for the automated eddy-current testingof the steam generator heat-exchange tubes at nuclear power plants with VVER reactors, was used to inspect the heat-exchange tubes in all of the steam generators. As a result of the test, the steam generator tubes were found to have discontinuities with the maximum depth of up to 10% of the nominal wall thickness which is tolerable. The inspection results have confirmed the unit to be fit for commercial operation.

### References

1. Technical Basis RTO-KR-UZK-15, issued 02.11.2015. Moscow. JSC «NIKIMT-Atomstroy» Publ., 2015. 50 p. (in Russian).
2. ATPP-15-2011. Standard Program for Preoperational Inspection of Base Metal and Welded Connections in Components and Pipelines of Security-Related Systems at NPPs with VVER-1200 Reactors. Moscow. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2011. 102 p. (in Russian).
3. GOST 27.002-2015. Industrial product dependability. Terms and definitions. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2016. 28 p. (in Russian).
4. Ul’trazvuk. Malen’kaya entsiklopediya. [Ultrasound. A small encyclopaedia.] Moscow. Sovetskaya entsiklopediya Publ., 1979. 400 p. (in Russian).
5. Statnikov E.Sh., Muktepavel V.O. Tekhnologiya ultrazvukovoi udarnoi obrabotki kak sredstvo povyshennoi nadezhnosti i dolgovechnosti svarnykh metallokonstruktsij. [Ultrasonic impact treatment as a method for improving reliability and durability of welded metal structures]. Svarochnoe proizvodstvo. 2003, iss. 4, pp. 25-29 (in Russian).
6. Marushchak P.O., Salo U.V., Bishchak R.T., Poberezhnyi L.Ya. Study of Main Gas Pipeline Steel Strain Hardening After Prolonged Operation. Chemical and Petroleum Engineering. 2014, v. 50, iss. 1-2, pp. 58-61.
7. Pleshanov V.S., Kibitkin V.V., Panin V.E. Mesomechanics and Fatigue Fracture for polycrystals with macroconcentratrs. Theoretical and Applied Fracture Mechanics. 1998, v. 30, no. 1, pp. 13-18.
8. Blaha F., Langenecker B. Plastitatsuntersuchungen von Menallkristallen in Ultraschallfeld. Naturwis. 1955, v. 20, no. 9, p. 556 (in German).
9. Resolution No. NVOAES-21R-368K(04-03)-2015, issued 25.06.2015 Moscow. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2015. 8 p. (in Russian).
10. Minin S.I., Trofimov A.I., Trofimov M.A. Tekhnologiya termicheskoj svarki tsirkulyatsionnykh truboprovodov AES s vozdeistviem ul’trazvuka. [Heat welding of NPP circulation pipelines with ultrasonification]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 4, pp. 5-11 (in Russian).
11. Abramov O.V.Kristallizatsiya metallov v ul’trazvukovom pole [Crystallisation of metals in ultrasonic field]. Мoscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1972. 256 p. (in Russian).
12. Kulemin A.V. Ul’trazvuk i diffuziya v metallakh [Ultrasound and diffusion in metals]. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1978. 200 p. (in Russian).
13. PNAE G-7-030-91. Unifitsirovannye metodiki nerazrushaiushchego kontrolia osnovnykh materialov (polufabrikatov), svarnykh soedinenij i naplavki oborudovaniya i truboprovodov AEU. Ultrazvukovoj control’. Chast’ 2. Kontrol’ svarnykh soedinenij i naplavki [Unified methods of non-destructive examination of the main materials (semi-finished items), weld joints and seams of nuclear power unit equipment and pipelines. Ultrasonic examination. Part 2. Examination of weld joints and seams.] Moscow. TsNIIAtominform, 1992. 157 p. (in Russian).
14. Sagalevich V.M. Metody ustraneniya svarochnykh deformatsij i napryazhenij [Methods for correcting welding deformations and stress]. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1974. 248 p. (in Russian).
15. Minin S.I., Trofimov A.I., Trofimov M.A. Avtomatizirovannaya ul’trazvukovaya sistema snyatiya ostatochnykh napryazhenij v svarnykh soedineniyakh tsirkuliatsionnykh truboprovodov AES [The automatic ultrasonic system for residual stress removal in NPP circulation pipeline weld joints]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 3, pp. 13-19 (in Russian).
16. MT 1.2.1.15.001.0206-2014. Sistema avtomatizirovannogo vikhretokovogo kontrolya teploobmennykh trub parogeneratorov atomnykh stantsij s reaktornymi ustanovkami tipa VVER «Politest-PG». Metodika kontrolya [Automated eddy current testing system for steam generator heat-exchange pipes at nuclear power plants with VVER-type reactors «Polytest-PG». Testing procedure.] Moscow. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2014. 77 p. (in Russian).
17. PT 61.00.00.00.00.00.RO2. Programma analiza dannykh vikhretokovogo kontrolya «PEGAS». Rukovodstvo operatora [«PEGAS» code for eddy current testing data analysis. The operator’s manual.] Moscow. LLC «Center for eddy current control’ POLITEST» Publ., 2012. 110 p. (in Russian).
18. Antonov A.V., Chepurko V.A. Statisticheskij analiz dannykh ob otkazakh oborudovaniya atomnykh stantsij v usloviyakh neodnorodnogo potoka sobytij [Statistical analysis of data on nuclear power plant equipment failures in the context of non-uniform event stream]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 3. pp. 20-27 (in Russian).
19. Finkelstein M. Failure rate modeling for reliability and risk. Verlag. London Limited: Springer, 2008. 290 p.