+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="15"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/15.pdf"
first_page="162"
last_page="170"
udc="621.039"
title="Experience of commissioning the V-392M reactor plant passive heat removal system"
original_title="Опыт ввода в эксплуатацию системы пассивного отвода тепла реакторной установки В-392М"
authors=["GalievKF", "YaurovSV", "GoncharovYeV", "VolnovAS"]
tags=["AES-2006 design", "V-392M", "VVER-1200", "passive heat removal system", "air valve", "regulator", "pre-commissioning"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.15"

+++

Structural features of components in the passive heat removal system (PHRS), first used in Russia in the VVER-1200 reactor, are considered. Structural deficiencies of the system’s air valves and regulators, revealed in the process of pre-commissioning activities and hampering the performance by the system of its design functions, are described. The causes for the deficiencies are unpredictable effects of the fluid thermodynamic processes on moving components. The equipment deficiencies were eliminated through the installation of additional equipment retainer units responding to the system actuation, and by additional adjustment of components. The retainer design allows the air valves to stay fully opened and prevents them from closing uncontrollably under the action of a rapidly ascending hot air flow inside the PHRS shell.

During the commissioning stage of Novovoronezh NPP II’s unit 1, following the equipment design update, the PHRS confirmed to be indispensible as the means of the reactor heat removal in conditions of an unexpected reactor scram, and proved to be efficient as part of an integrated PHRS test at the reactor plant power of 75%. The PHRS heat exchanger’s total heat removal capacity was over 100 MW, with the ambient air temperature being –13°C, and the time for the PHRS rise to power was not more than 90 seconds, which meets the system’s design performance.

### References

1. Safety assessment report. Novovoronezh NPP-2 Power unit No. 1. Chapter 12. Safety systems. Moscow. JSC Atomenergoproect Publ., 2013, 240 p. (in Russian).
2. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasilyev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with VVER-1000 type reactor. From physical basics of exploitation to evolution design. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010. 604 p. (in Russian).
3. Afrov A.M., Andrushechko S.A., Ukraintsev V.F., Vasilyev B.Yu., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kokosadze E.L., Ivanov E.A. VVER-1000: physical basics of exploitation, nuclear fuel, safety. Moscow. University book, Logos Publ., 2006, 488 p. (in Russian).
4. Equipment of passive heat removal system. Explanatory note (392M.19 PZ). Podol’sk. OKB «GIDROPRESS» Publ., 2008, 33 p. (in Russian).
5. Equipment of passive heat removal system. Technological regulation of operation (392M.19 D4). Podol’sk. OKB «GIDROPRESS» Publ., 2010, 25 p. (in Russian).
6. Act No. 1009 on the identified non-compliance. Novovoronezh. Novovoronezh NPP Publ., 2015, 2 p. (in Russian).
7. Act No. 61/2017-РЦ6/06-02 of checking operability of air shutters PHRS. Novovoronezh. Novovoronezh NPP Publ., 2017, 6 p. (in Russian).
8. Operating instruction of passive heat removal system 1 JNB50-80. Novovoronezh. Novovoronezh NPP Publ., 2015, 99 p. (in Russian).
9. Act No. 640/2016-РЦ6/06-02 of checking condition of regulating devices PHRS. Novovoronezh. Novovoronezh NPP Publ., 2016, 5 p. (in Russian).
10. Commissioning protocol «Checking the effectiveness of PHRS (Complex testing)». Novovoronezh. Novovoronezh branch of «Atomtechenergo» Co, 2017, 7 p. (in Russian).