+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:08:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="16"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/03/16.pdf"
first_page="171"
last_page="182"
udc="621.311"
title="The experience of implementing the design chemistry during the NVNPP II 1 commissioning"
original_title="Опыт освоения проектной химической технологии при пусконаладочных работах и вводе блока в промышленную эксплуатацию"
authors=["VitkovskySL", "DanilovAP", "ShchedrinMG", "KolyaginaIA"]
tags=["design chemistry", "chemical water treatment", "preliminary treatment", "radioactive water treatment", "cleansing", "passivation", "sedimentation", "reagents"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.16"

+++

The article covers the results of the design chemistry implementation during the commissioning of the innovative Unit № 1 at the Novovoronezh NPP II, equipped with the VVER-1200 reactor. The design chemistry is composed of the requirements for primary and secondary coolant quality, recirculating coolant water (including essential service water), solutions for safety systems operation as well as tools for their conditioning. Chemical water treatment plays a significant role at all stages of commissioning and low power testing. An analysis is made of essential system reactivation and cleansing stages, preliminary treatment technologies, primary and secondary circuit chemical water treatment, and radioactive water treatment. The design advantages are highlighted, such as the use of reverse osmosis as one of the stages of water treatment and high-pressure filters on the bypass purge system. Consideration is given to some problematic issues that arose in the course of the start-up operations during the re-opening of the equipment, the processing of radioactive trap water and in the recycling water supply system. The authors also analyze the design flaws and issues that may arise in the course of continuous operation and the ways to solve them: (1) provide a reference technology and equipment for the processing of radioactive drain water; (2) exclude washing with chlorinated hydrocarbons from the technology of re-opening the TG internal surfaces; (3) apply water treatment with inhibitors providing calcium transport with a value close to 100% to the circulating water supply system with a cooling tower or (4) provide liming of all additional water for southern NPPs to minimize the carbonate index.

### References

1. Saakov E.S., Ryasny S.I. Commissioning of NPP power units. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2007, 496 p. (in Russian).
2. Zmitko M., Kysela J., Marcinsky P., Bolcha J., Subrt J. Water Chemistry and Operational Experience during Hot Functional Tests at Mochovce and Temelin NPPs. Water Chemistry of Nuclear Reactor Systems, BNES. 2001, no. 8, pp. 476-478.
3. VVER Operational Experience – Surface Preconditioning and its Effect on Radiation Situation. Water Chemistry Improvements at NPPs, SFEN. Avignon, France, April 22-26, 2002.
4. Zmitko M. (Nuclear Research Institute, Czech Republic). Primary Water Chemistry Experience in the Czech NPPs. IAEA Regional Workshop on Impact of Water Chemistry on Primary Circuit Component Integrity South Ukraine NPP, November 17-21, 2003.
5. Susakin S.N., Brykov S.I., Zadonsky N.V., Bystrova O.S. Water-chemical regime of the primary circuit for NPPs with VVER-TOI. 8-th MNTK JSC «Concern «Rosenergoatom» «Water-chemical regime of nuclear power plants». Moscow, Oct. 23-25, 2012 (in Russian).
6. Artemiev A.M., Alibekov S.Y. Physico-chemical basis of the process of water treatment. Zhurnal Nauchnykh Publikatsij Aspirantov i Doktorantov. 2010, no. (52), pp. 123-124 (in Russian).
7. Verkhoshentseva N.N., Davletshina G.I. Experience in the operation of reverse osmosis plants in the systems of water treatment of power and metallurgical objects of OJSC «MMK». Energosberezhenie i vodopodgotovka. 2006, no. 5, pp. 25-27 (in Russian).
8. Volkov V.N., Gorbunov S.A. Modern technologies of reverse osmosis and ion exchange in water supply systems of heat supply: efficiency and ecological compatibility. Energosberezhenie i vodopodgotovka. 2010, no. 4 (66), pp. 13-15 (in Russian).
9. Pervov A.G., Bondarenko V.I., Balaev I.S., Kukushkin D.A. / Reverse osmosis and ion exchange: which technology will win in the water treatment of the XXI century? Ekologiya Proizvodstva (prilozhenie Energetika). 2006, no. 1, pp. 1-5 (in Russian).
10. Pervov A.G., Bondarenko V.I., Zhabin G.G. Application of combined systems of reverse osmosis and ion exchange for preparation of feed water of steam boilers. Energosberezhenie i vodopodgotovka. 2004, no.5 (32), pp. 25-27 (in Russian).
11. Gusev B.A., Kirpikov D.A., Kostin M.M., Miroshnichenko I.V. Experience in the operation of the high purity water treatment system. Proc. of 3-rd scientific and technical meeting «Problems and prospects for the development of chemical and radio-chemical control in nuclear power engineering». September 13-15, 2007. Sosnovy Bor. FGUP «NITI n.a. A.P. Alexandrov» Publ., p. 59 (in Russian).
12. Gromov S.L., Panteleev A.A.. Increasing the efficiency of power equipment. Proc. of V-th Anniversary All-Russia Scientific and Practical Conference «Technological solutions that increase the economic efficiency and environmental safety of water treatment plants». Nov. 1-2, 2010. Ivanovo. IGEU Publ., 2010, pp. 136-143 (in Russian).
13. Tretyakova K.B. Analysis of design features of tower-type evaporative cooling towers on their thermal efficiency. VI-th All-Russian Scientific Conference with International Participation «Thermophysical Foundations of Energy Technologies». Tomsk. Tomsk Polytechnic University Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
14. RD 210.006-90 Rules for Technological Design of Nuclear Power Plants (with WWER Reactors). Moscow. Ministry of Atomic Energy and Industry of the USSR Publ., 1990, 221 p. (in Russian).
15. Bodnar Y.F. Optimization of the water-chemical regime of circulating cooling systems with granaries. Energosberezhenie i vodopodgotovka. 2008, no. 3, pp. 8-11 (in Russian).
16. Smiesko, J. Bystriansky, A.Szalo Use of Ethanolamine for Alkalisation of Secondary Coolant First Experience at VVER Reactor. International Conference «Chemistry in Water Reactors», SPEEN, Avignon, France, April 22 -26, 2002.
17. Roschektaev B.М. Water-chemical regime of NPPs with VVER-1000 and BMK-1000 reactors. Textbook. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2010, 132 p. (in Russian).
18. Shutikov A.V., Savchenko V.E., Vigranenko Y.M., Khrustalev V.A. Ways to improve the water and chemical regime of the second circuit of the NPP with VVER-1000. Izvestiya Tomskogo Polytekhnicheskogo Universiteta, 2008, v. 312, no. 2, pp. 39-43 (in Russian).
19. Aleksandrov A.B., Babushkin A.V., Belozerov I.M., Voloshchuk A.V., Kritsky V.G., Lyakh A.G., Lyakhov N.Z., Magomedbekov E.P. , Muratov E.P., Potapenko V.I., Semenov A.A. On the adjustment of the water-chemical regime of the coolant of the first circuit of domestic reactors of the VVER type. Abstracts of the 7th MNTK «Safety, efficiency and economy of nuclear energy». May 2010. Moscow. JSC «Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2010, pp. 358-360 (in Russian).
20. Aleksandrov A.B., Babushkin A.V., Belozerov I.М., Voloshchuk A.V. On the adjustment of the water-chemical regime of the coolant of the first circuit of domestic reactors of the VVER type. Abstracts of the V-th International Scientific and Practical Conference «Physico-technical problems of nuclear energy and industry». June 2010. Tomsk. TPU Publ., 2010, p. 63 (in Russian).