+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:07:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="17"
file="/pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-17.pdf"
first_page="183"
last_page="194"
udc="621.039.7"
title="Radioactive waste management at the Novovoronezh NPP II-1 (NPP-2006 DESIGN)"
original_title="Обращение с радиоактивными отходами на блоке № 1 Нововоронежской АЭС-2 проекта АЭС-2006"
authors=["VolkovAS", "NalivaykoEM"]
tags=["Novovoronezh NPP II", "radioactive waste", "solid/liquid/gaseous waste management"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.17"

+++

For the first time in the literature cited, a detailed description is given of the implemented design solutions for radioactive waste (RW) management during the operation of the Novovoronezh NPP II-1 constructed under the NPP-2006 Project. The sources of formation of radioactive wastes of various physical states and different levels of radioactivity are described. The project on RW management at the NvNPP II is based on the concept of temporary organized storage at NPPs of solid and conditioned (solidified) RW in expendable reinforced concrete protective containers designed for the conditions of RW temporary storage in engineering structures for 50 years and for the burial conditions in near-surface or underground cemeteries for 300 years.

The solid and gaseous RW management systems at the NvNPP II-1 implement technical solutions based on the existing experience of operating units of VVER NPPs. New in the NPP project, the technology of treating drain water, which is the main source of LRW formation, was tested during the unit pilot operation on real processing media (drain water) containing radionuclides. A number of shortcomings have been identified, i.e., the installation low capacity for the initial drain water, limited selectivity of the chosen sorbent for the precipitated radionuclides, low dirt capacity of the membrane filters), which do not allow efficient use of design facilities with the proposed technology for processing drain water at NPPs without modernization and additional refinement of equipment operating modes.

Taking into account the possibility of risks due to the introduction of the project drain water treatment system with a new non-referential technology and equipment, the general designer, JSC «Atomenergoproekt», at the insistence of the Novovoronezh NPP, provided for a backup drain water treatment scheme at the NVNPP II-1 using the traditional thermal evaporation technology for NPPs. The backup scheme with a vaporizer with a capacity of 6 m3/h made it possible to treat the formed drain water, starting from the unit physical start-up stage.

### References

1. Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste, Including Decommissioning. Safety Requirements. No. WS-R-2. Vienna. IAEA, 2000, 26 p.
2. NP-019-15. Collection, processing, storage and conditioning of liquid radioactive waste. Safety requirements. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 23 p. (in Russian).
3. NP-020-15. Collection, processing, storage and conditioning of solid radioactive waste. Safety requirements. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 14 p. (in Rusian).
4. NP-021-15. Gaseous radioactive waste management. Safety requirements. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 12 p. (in Rusian).
5. Novovoronezh NPP. NPP-2006 Design. Available at http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed 20.06.2017).
6. NP-002-15. Safety rules for handling radioactive waste from nuclear power plants. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 20 p. (in Russian).
7. RB-122-16. Safety assessment in the management of radioactive waste prior to disposal. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ., 2016, 21 p. (in Russian).
8. NP-067-05. Basic rules for accounting for radioactive substances and radioactive waste in organizations. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2005, 36 p. (in Russian).
9. NP-058-14. Safety in the management of radioactive waste. General provisions. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2014, 15 p. (in Russian).
10. IAEA safety standards. Management of radioactive waste before disposal. General safety requirements, part 5. Vienna. IAEA, 2010, 46 p. (in Russian).
11. Klyuchnikov A.A., Pazukhin E.M., Shigera Yu.M., Shigera V.Yu. Radioactive wastes from NPPs and methods of handling them. Kiev. IPB AES NAN Ukraine Publ., 2005, 487 p. (in Russian).
12. Onufrienko S.V. Liquid radioactive wastes management in the design of a new generation of NPPs with VVER type reactors. Ph.D.Thesis in Engineering Sciences. St. Petersburg, 2002 (in Russian).
13. Savkin A.E., Adamovich D.V., Bely M.D. Options for handling radioactive waste from nuclear power plants. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i novye materialy. 2014, no. 3 (78), pp. 87-95 (in Russian).
14. Volkova T.S., Slunchev O.M., Tananaev I.G., Bobrov P.A. Methods of handling organic LRW. Voprosy radiatsionnoj bezopasnosti. 2012, no. 1, pp. 48-60 (in Russian).
15. NP-001-15. General safety provisions for nuclear power plants. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 74 p. (in Russian).