+++

categories="article"
date="2017-10-02T00:06:00+03:00"
issue="2017-03"
issue_name="2017 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="18"
file="/pdf/2017/03/2017-03-article-18.pdf"
first_page="195"
last_page="194"
udc="621.039.544.8"
title="Protactinium-231 – new burnable neutron absorber"
original_title="Протактиний-231 – новый выгорающий поглотитель нейтронов"
authors=["KulikovGG", "KulikovEG", "ShmelevAN", "ApseVA"]
tags=["burnable absorber", "protactinium-231", "gadolinium", "erbium", "high fuel burn-up", "very long fuel campaign", "stabilized multiplying properties"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.18"

+++

To compensate reactivity excess in nuclear reactors burnable neutron absorbers such as gadolinium and erbium are used. Their daughter nuclides resulting from neutron absorption by erbium and gadolinium play no important role in terms of neutron-physical processes occurring in the reactor core. A burnable neutron absorber, daughter nuclides of which would have a beneficial effect on fission chain reaction, is of a great interest.

The aim of the work is to study neutron-physical properties of new burnable neutron absorber – 231Pa, and possibilities of its producing in significant quantities. The chain of isotopic transformations starting from 231Pa is an analogue to the chain of isotopic transformations starting from 237Np. However, gradual improvement of neutron-multiplying properties in 237Np-chain can be only achieved in fast neutron spectra while in the case of 231Pa-chain a positive neutron balance can be achieved both in fast and thermal neutron spectra. So, in this sense the chain starting from 231Pa is a unique one. In addition, 237Np can be produced in nuclear reactors as a result of neutron radiative capture by 235U while significant amounts of 231Pa can be only produced through the threshold (n,2n) and (n,3n)-reactions of 232Th under its bombardment by ultra high-energy neutrons. So high-energy neutrons are practically absent even in fast spectrum reactors, these neutrons can be produced by fusion facilities only. Production of 231Pa in fusion facilities and the further use of 231Pa in nuclear power reactors can make it possible to realize some potential capabilities of fusion facilities for radical increase of nuclear fuel burn-up. Thus, isotope 231Pa is a new and unique burnable neutron absorber that was not proposed yet.

During implementation of the work evaluated nuclear data libraries JENDL-4.0 and ENDF/B-V were used, as well as computer software system SCALE-4.3.

We obtained the following results.

1. In contrast to conventional burnable neutron absorbers based on gadolinium and erbium, the isotope of protactinium proposed in this paper seems to be more attractive because it allows us not only to compensate initial reactivity excess, but also to provide high fuel burn-up thanks to good multiplying properties of its daughter nuclides.

2. Significant quantities of protactinium could be produced in hybrid fusion-fission reactors, which are sources of neutrons (not sources of energy), and parameters of which have been already achieved at present time at experimental facilities in USA, Japan, UK.

### References

1. Characteristics and Use of Urania-Gadolinia Fuels. IAEA-TECDOC-844. Vienna, IAEA, 1995.
2. Renier J.-P.A., Grossbeck L. Development of improved burnable poisons for commercial nuclear power reactors. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 2001.
3. Shibata K., Iwamoto O., Nakagawa T., Iwamoto N., Ichihara A., Kunieda S., Chiba S., Furutaka K., Otuka N., Ohsawa T., Murata T., Matsunobu H., Zukeran A., Kamada S., and Katakura J. JENDL-4.0: A New Library for Nuclear Science and Engineering. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2011, v. 48, no. 1, pp. 1-30.
4. Kulikov G., Kulikov E., Kryuchkov E., Shmelev А. Achievement of Higher Burn-up and Proliferation Protection of LWR Fuel by Introduction of 231Pa and 237Np. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2011, no. 4, pp. 80-92 (in Russian).
5. Kulikov E., Kulikov G., Kryuchkov E., Shmelev А. Achievement of Higher Burn-up of LWR Fuel by Introduction of 231Pa. Nuclear Physics and Engineering. 2013, v. 4, no. 4, pp. 291-299 (in Russian).
6. SCALE: A Comprehensive Modeling and Simulation Suite for Nuclear Safety Analysis and Design. Available at: http://scale.ornl.gov/scale (accessed 7 Jul. 2017).
7. Rearden B.T., Jessee M.A. SCALE Code System, Oak Ridge National Laboratory report ORNL/TM-2005/39.
8. Cvetkov P.V. Ob’edinennyj odnomernyj raschet izmenenija sostava topliva v processe obluchenija v reaktore i radiacionnyh harakteristik obluchennogo topliva s pomoshh’ju kompleksa programm SCALE (versiya 4.3) [Combined one-dimensional calculation of the fuel composition change in the process of irradiation in a reactor and radiation characteristics of irradiated fuel using program SCALE (version 4.3)]. Moscow, 1998 (in Russian).
9. Maslov V.M., Baba M., Hasegawa A., Kornilov N.V., Kagalenko A.B., Tetereva N.A. Neutron Data Evaluation of 231Pa. International Atomic Energy Agency, INDC(BLR)-019, 2004.
10. Incoloy – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incoloy (accessed 7 Jul. 2016).
11. Nuclear Energy Agency. Uranium 2014: Resources, Production and Demand. 2014.
12. Stewart D.C., Macias E.S., Basile L.J., Milsted J. Buildup of radioactive products in thermal reactors. III. ANL-7486, Technical Report. 1968.
13. Marin S.V., Shatalov G.E. Izotopnyj sostav topliva v blankete gibridnogo termojadernogo reaktora s torievym ciklom [The isotopic composition of the fuel in the blanket of hybrid fusion reactor with thorium nuclear fuel cycle]. Atomnaya energiya. 1984, v. 56, no. 5, pp. 289-291 (in Russian).
14. Kuteev B.V., Hripunov V.I. Sovremennyj vzglyad na gibridnyj termojadernyj reactor [The modern consideration of the hybrid fusion reactor]. VANT. Ser. Termoyadernyj sintez. 2009, v. 1, pp. 3-29 (in Russian).
15. Leonard B.R. A Review of Fusion-Fission (hybrid) Concepts. Nuclear Technology, 1973, v. 20, pp. 161-178.
16. Shieff H.E.J., Goodfellow H., Gray J., Mullender M.L., Weale J.W. Measurements of the reaction rate distributions produced in a large thorium cylinder by a central source of DT neutrons. United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, 1977.
17. Krumbein A., Lemanska M., Segev M., Wagschal J.J., Yaari A. Reaction rate calculations in Uranium blankets surrounding a central Deuterium-Tritium neutron source. Nuclear Technology. 1980, v. 48, pp. 110-116.
18. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kurnaev V.A., Salahutdinov G.H., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. Hybrid Fusion-Fission Reactor with a Thorium Blanket: Its Potential in the Fuel Cycle of Nuclear Reactors. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, no. 10, pp. 1100-1111.
19. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Geraskin N.I., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. Fuel cycle of Russian nuclear power with involvement of thorium resources and thermonuclear neutron source with Th-blanket // Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. – 2016, №1, pp. 111-118 (in Russian).
20. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Geraskin N.I., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. Advanced nuclear fuel cycle for the RF using actinides breeding in thorium blankets of fusion neutron source. Nuclear Energy and Technology. 2016, v. 2, iss. 2, pp.147-150.