+++

categories="article"
date="2020-09-16T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2020-03"
issue_name="2020 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/03/03.pdf"
first_page="30"
last_page="40"
udc="621.039.50OI"
title="Investigation of the impact of steady-state VVER-1000 core characteristics on the reactor stability with respect to xenon oscillations"
original_title="Исследование влияния характеристик стационарного состояния активной зоны ВВЭР-1000 (1200) на устойчивость реактора к ксеноновым колебаниям"
authors=["AlMalkawiRT", "VygovskySB", "BataynehOW"]
tags=["reactor stability", "xenon oscillations", "axial offset", "VVER-1000 (1200)", "flexible (load tracing) operating modes"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.03"

+++

The article presents a method for obtaining an analytical expression for the criterion of stability of a VVER-1000 (1200) reactor with respect to xenon oscillations of the local power in the core, containing an explicit dependence of the criterion ratio coefficients on the arbitrary axial neutron field distribution in steady states of the core. Based on the data of numerical experiments using a full-scale model of the Kalinin NPP power units, the authors present the results of checking the validity of this expression for the reactor stability criterion with respect to xenon oscillations for different NPPs with VVER-1000 (1200) reactors in the conditions of load-following modes and non-steady-state reactor xenon poisoning, which can lead to xenon oscillations of the local power throughout the reactor core with VVER-1000 (1200). In this case, the task is to ensure the reactor stability in relation to xenon oscillations of the local power in the core. If the stability problem is not solved, the axial oscillations of xenon can become continuous and, accordingly, be accompanied by an unlimited number of cycles of local power oscillations. This will lead to cyclic thermal loads on the fuel element claddings, which can change the thermomechanical properties of the cladding material, since this affects safe operation of the reactor core.

### References

1. Vygovsky S.B., Al Malkawi R.T., Khachatryan A.G. A research of control algorithms for the VVER-1200 reactor core in the condition of maneuvering (load following) modes. Proc. of the XVth International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants and Personnel Training. Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2018, pp. 117-119 (in Russian).
2. Averyanova S.P., Dubov A. A., Kosourov K. B., Semchenkov Yu. M., Filimonov P. E. VVER-1200/1300 operation in a daily load schedule. Atomnaya Energiya. 2012, v. 113, no. 5, pp. 247-252 (in Russian).
3. Averyanova S.P., Vohmyanina N.S., Zlobin D.A., Filimonov P.E., Kuznetsov V.I., Lagovsky V.B. Offset-power phase diagram method to control the energy release of the reactor. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 121, no. 3, pp. 123-127 (in Russian).
4. Bell G.J., Glasstone S. Theory of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Mir Publ., 2001, 301 p. (in Russian).
5. Hitchcock A. Stability of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Gosatomizdat Publ., 1963, 68 p. (in Russian).
6. Rudik A.P. Xenon Transients in Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974, 117 p. (in Russian).
7. Semenov V.K., Volman M.A. On the question of xenon oscillations in a nuclear reactor. Vestnik Ivanovskogo Gosudarstvennogo Energeticheskogo Universiteta. 2015, v. 2, pp. 15-20 (in Russian).
8. Ryabov N.A., Semenov A.A. Study of point model for xenon oscillations. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedenij. Yadernaya Energetika. 2006, no. 2, pp. 66-73 (in Russian).
9. Vygovsky S.B., Ryabov N.O., Semenov A.A., Chernov E.V., Bogachek L.N. Physical and Structural Features of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2011. 376
p. (in Russian).
10. Povarov V.P., Lebedev O.V., Makeev V.V. Prevention and Suppression of Axial Xenon Oscillations in the VVER-1000 Core. Teploenergetika. 2003, v. 5, pp. 11-15 (in Russian).
11. Averyanova S.P., Kosourov K. B., Semchenkov Yu. M. Study of xenon transients in VVER-1000 at Tianwan NPP (China). Atomnaya Energiya. 2008, v. 105, no. 4, pp. 183-190 (in Russian).
12. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasilyev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with the VVER/1000 Reactor from the Physical Foundations of the Operation Until the Evolution of the Project. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010, 604 p. (in Russian).
13. Averyanova S.P., Filimonov P.E.Xenon stability of VVER-1200. Atomnaya Energiya. 2009, v. 107, no. 6, pp. 348-351 (in Russian).
14. Kosourov K.B., Paplov V.I., Averyanova S.P., Aleshin S.S. Development of the Technical Project of NPP/2006. Report of NRC Kurchatov Institute. Inventory No. 32/1-79-310, August 26, 2010, pp. 324-378 (in Russian).
15. Maksimov M.V., Beglov K.V., Kanazirsky N.F. Control of the Axial Offset in a Nuclear Reactor in the Condition of Maneuvering Regimes. Avtomatizatsiya Tekhnologicheskih i Biznes/Processov. 2015, v. 7, no. 1, pp. 54-61 (in Russian).
16. Vygovsky S.B., Zimin V.G., Chernov Ye.V., Korikovsky K.P., Krayushkin Yu.A., Mishcherin S.A., Osadchy M.A., Semyonov A.A., Strashnykh V.P., Chernov E.V., Chernakov V.A. PROSTOR Software Complex (Ver. 1). The Appendix to the Certification Passport № 182 from October 28, 2004. Moscow. VNIIAES Publ., 8 p. (in Russian).
17. Anokhin A.Yu., Tsibulsky V.F., Davidenko V.D. The UNK Program Complex for Detailed Calculation of the Neutron Spectrum in Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Report of NRC «Kurchatov Institute». Inventory No. 35-410-4/81, May 18, 2001 (in Russian).
18. Vygovsky S.B., Korolev S.A., Chernov E.V., Semenov A.A., Chernakov V.A. Experience of using the PROSTOR software package in the calculation support for the operation of nuclear power plants with VVER. Yadernaya Fizika i Inzhiniring, 2014, v. 5, no. 1, pp. 15-28 (in Russian).