+++

categories="article"
date="2020-09-16T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2020-03"
issue_name="2020 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/03/04.pdf"
first_page="41"
last_page="49"
udc="621.039.537"
title="On a significant deceleration of the kinetics of fast transient processes in a fast reactor"
original_title="О существенном замедлении кинетики быстрых переходных процессов в ядерном реакторе на быстрых нейтронах"
authors=["KulikovGG", "ShmelevAN", "ApseVA", "KulikovEG"]
tags=["kinetics", "fast reactor", "reflectors based on natural lead and lead-208", "VVER and CANDU thermal reactors", "nuclear chain reaction", "transient process", "asymptotic runaway"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.04"

+++

The kinetics of nuclear reactors is determined by the average neutron lifetime. When the inserted reactivity is more than the effective fraction of delayed neutrons, the reactor kinetics becomes very rapid. The fast reactor kinetics can be slowed down by increasing the neutron lifetime. The authors consider the possibility of using a lead isotope, 208Pb, as a neutron reflector with specific properties in the lead-cooled fast reactor. To analyze the emerging effects in a fast reactor, a point kinetics model was selected, which takes into account neutrons returning from the 208Pb reflector to the reactor core.

Such specific properties of 208Pb as the high atomic weight and weak neutron absorption allow neutrons from the reactor core to penetrate deeply into 208Pb reflector, slow down in it, and have a noticeable probability to return to the reactor core and affect the chain fission reaction. The neutrons coming back from the 208Pb reflector have a long «dead-time» i.e., the sum of times when neutrons leave the reactor core entering the 208Pb reflector and then diffuse back into the reactor core. During the ‘dead-time’, these neutrons cannot affect the chain fission reaction. In terms of the delay time, the neutrons returning from the deep layers of the 208Pb reflector are close to the delayed neutrons. Moreover, the number of the neutrons coming back from the 208Pb reflector considerably exceeds the number of the delayed neutrons.

As a result, the neutron lifetime formed by the prompt neutron lifetime and the «dead-time» of the neutrons from the 208Pb reflector can be substantially increased. This will lead to a longer reactor runaway period, which will mitigate the effects of prompt supercriticality. Thus, the use of 208Pb as a neutron reflector can significantly improve the safe fast reactor operation.

### References

1. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G., Artisyuk V.V. Radiogenic Lead with Dominant Content of 208Pb: New Coolant and Neutron Moderator for Innovative Nuclear Facilities. Internet Journal of Hindawi Publishing Corporation: Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations. 2011, article ID 252903, 12 p. Available at: http://www.hindawi.com/journals/stni/2011/252903/ (accessed Dec. 20, 2019). DOI: 10.1155/2011/252903 .
2. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kryuchkov E.F., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. Application of Radiogenic Lead with Dominant Content of 208Pb for Long Prompt Neutron Lifetime in Fast Reactor. Nuclear Technology. 2013, v. 183, no. 3, pp. 409-426.
3. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A., Ternovykh M.Yu., Kulikov E.G. Favorable features in kinetics of fast reactors with physically thick reflector containing 208Pb. Proc. of the International conference PHYSOR-2014. «The Role of Reactor Physics Toward a Sustainable Future». Kyoto, Japan, 2014.
4. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A., Chubko N.V. The Role of Neutrons from the Reflector of a Fast Reactor in Increasing the Resistance of the Fission Chain Reaction to Rapid Runaway. Atomnaya Energiya. 2017, v. 123, iss. 6, pp. 351-352 (in Russian).
5. Kulikov E.G. Radiogenic Lead as Coolant, Reflector and Moderator in Advanced Fast Reactors. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2017, v. 781, no. 1, article 012002. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/781/1/012002.
6. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. On fundamental Quality of Fission Chain Reaction to Oppose Rapid Runaways of Nuclear Reactors. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2017, v. 781, no. 1, article 012006. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/781/1/012006.
7. Kulikov G.G., Apse V.A., Shmelev A.N., Kulikov E.G. Improved Safety Fast Reactor with «Reservoir» for Delayed Neutrons Generating. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2017, v. 781, no. 1, article 012009. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/781/1/012009.
8. Kulikov G.G., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G., Kozhahmet B.K., Shkodin A.O., Shmelev A.N. Radiogenic lead from poly-metallic thorium ores as a valuable material for advanced nuclear facilities. Kerntechnik. 2017, v. 82, no. 1, pp. 87-91. DOI: 10.3139/124.110665.
9. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. Safety of a fast reactor with a reflector containing a moderator with a high atomic weight and low neutron absorption. Proc. of the V-th International Scientific and Technical Conference «Innovative Projects and Technologies of Nuclear power». Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2018 (in Russian).
10. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. Models of the In-Hour Equation for Fast Reactors Surrounded by a Physically Thick Neutron Reflector for Upgrading the Reactor Safety. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2018, v. 1133, no. 1, article 012036. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1133/1/012036.
11. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. Nuclear safety of the fast reactor with 208Pb-reflector at neutron flash above effective fraction of delayed neutrons. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2018, v. 1133, no. 1, article 012037. DOI: 10.1088/ 1742-6596/1133/1/012037.
12. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. Peculiarities of the Fast Reactor with Reflector from Lead-208. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2018, v. 1133, no. 1, article 012038. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1133/1/012038.
13. Bell G.J., Glasstone S. Nuclear Reactor Theory. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1970. 494 p.
14. Bekurtz K., Wirtz K. Neutron Physics. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968, 456 p. (in Russian).
15. Apse V.A., Shmelev A.N. Use of the Computer Code TIME26 in the Training Design of Fast Reactors and Accelerator Driven Systems. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2008, 63 p. (in Russian).