+++

categories="article"
date="2020-09-16T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2020-03"
issue_name="2020 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/03/10.pdf"
first_page="102"
last_page="107"
udc="621.039.588"
title="The problem formulation to study the excitation of oscillations of fuel elements in the presence of a helical vortex"
original_title="Постановка задачи в обоснование возбуждения колебаний твэлов при наличии винтообразного вихря"
authors=["ShipilovVV", "AvdeevEF"]
tags=["helical vortex cord", "breakdown of fuel elements", "angular velocity vector", "inertial wave vector", "vibration period and frequency", "pressure fluctuation amplitude", "shear power"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.10"

+++

The article presents an attempt to theoretically substantiate the oscillations of fuel elements in fuel assemblies, leading to the destruction of spacing grids and breakdown of fuel elements.

The experimental data obtained when organizing a helical vortex cord around a rod are used to get theoretical expression of the transverse power. It is based on the investigation of interaction of inertial waves and a helical vortex.

Calculations of forces multidirectional along the length of the rod causing it to oscillate are presented. The magnitude of forces is found from experimental data and according to a theoretical formula.

The possible danger of using spacer grids with deflectors swirling the flow around the fuel rod, as well as «SHADR» flow meters in RBMK technological channels, is indicated.

### References

1. Fomichev M.S. Experimental Hydrodynamics of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 248 p. (in Russian).
2. Miklyaev I.A. Oscillating Processes at Flows in Channels with Complex Cross3Sections. Dr. Phys. and Math. Sci. Diss. Moscow. MFTI Publ.,2001, 92 p. (in Russian).
3. Dement’ev B.A. Nuclear Power Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990. 352 p. (in Russian).
4. Kirillov P.L., Bobkov V.P., Zhukov A.V., Yur’ev Yu.S. Handbook of Thermal Hydraulic Calculations in Nuclear Power Engineering. Moscow. Atomenergoizdat Publ., 2010. 770 p. (in Russian).
5. Kirillov P.L., Yur’ev Yu.S., Bobkov V.P. Handbook of Thermal3Hydraulic Calculations (Nuclear Reactors, Heat Exchangers, Steam Generators). Moscow. Atomenergoizdat Publ., 1990. 360 p. (in Russian).
6. Kirillov P.L., Bogoslovskaya G.P. Heat and Mass Transfer in Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2000. 456 p. (in Russian).
7. Augutis Yu., Alzbutas R., Matuzas V. Reliability management of the system for measuring the flow of coolant SHADR-32M in the RBMK-1500 reactor. Energetika. 2002, no. 4, pp. 27-32 (in Russian).
8. Pereguda A. I. Reliability of the RBMK-1000 coolant flow measurement system. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 3, pp. 148-159; DOI: 10.26583/npe.2018.3.13 (in Russian).
9. Proskuryakov K.N., Anikeev A.V., Afshar E., Pisareva D.A. Use of CFD-model of VVER-1200 reactor for forecasting of fluctuations of fuel assemblies. Globalnaya Yadernaya Bezopasnost. Ekspluatatsiya Yadernykh Obyektov. 2019, no. 4, pp. 62-70; DOI: 10.26583/ gns-2019-04-07 (in Russian).
10. Denisov V.P., Dragunov E.G. VVER Reactor Plants for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2002. 480 p. (in Russian).
11. Perevezentsev V.V. Spectral characteristics of pressure pulsation and hydrodynamic loads on the fuel rod bundles in the turbulent flow of the coolant in the fuel assemblies of PWR. Problemy Mashinostroyeniya i Nadezhnosti Mashin. 2019, no. 7, pp. 46-53; DOI: 10.1134/s0235711919070083 (in Russian).
12. Subbotin V.I., Ibragimov M.Kh., Ushakov P.A. Hydrodynamics and Heat Exchange in Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975. 408 p. (in Russian).
13. Pereguda A.I., Belozerov V.I. Prediction of reliability of flow sensors of SHADR-32m heat carrier. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 1, pp. 51-62; DOI: 10.26583/npe.2017.1.05 (in Russian).
14. Kapur S., Lamberson L. Reliability and System Design. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1980. 598 p. (in Russian).
15. Troyanov V.M., Lihachyov Yu.I., Folomeev V.I. Method for calculating the longitudinal-transverse bend of the VVER-1000 nonshell fuel assembly at operating loads. Izvestia VysshikhUchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2002, no 2. pp. 44-54 (in Russian).
16. Subbotin V.I., Ushakov P.A., Gabrianovich B.N., Talanov V.D., Sviridenko I.P. Heat transfer and hydraulic resistance in the densely packed corridor rod beams. Atomnaya Energiya. 1962, v. 13, iss. 2, pp. 162-169 (in Russian).
17. Petukhov B.S. Heat Exchange and Resistance at Laminar Flow of Liquid in Pipes. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1967, 412 p. (in Russian).
18. Ain E.M., Puchkov P.I. Hydraulic Resistance of the Close Longitudinal Flowing Beams of Smooth Rods. Izvestia VysshikhUchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1996, no. 8, p. 129 (in Russian).