+++

categories="article"
date="2020-09-16T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2020-03"
issue_name="2020 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/03/11.pdf"
first_page="108"
last_page="116"
udc="621.039.531"
title="Study of V-Fe system alloys by internal friction and electrical resistance"
original_title="Исследование сплавов системы V#Fe методами внутреннего трения и электросопротивления"
authors=["ZakharovaМI", "TarasikovVP"]
tags=["vanadium", "iron", "alloys", "oxygen", "nitrogen", "impurity atoms", "electrical resistance", "internal friction", "annealing"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.11"

+++

The development of structural materials with high stability of properties in radiation fields is an urgent task of radiation materials science.

The V-Fe metal system is a unique object for studying the mechanisms of the influence of impurities and alloying elements on the development of vacancy porosity in metals under the action of neutrons.

Vanadium alloys with 0.6, 1.5, 2.5, 2.8, and 3.3 at.% iron were studied by the methods of low-frequency internal friction and electrical resistance. The study was carried out on samples cut from ingots.

The results of the analysis of the obtained data are as follows:

– the vanadium alloys with Fe content of 0.6, 1.5, 2.5, 2.8 and 3.3 at.% are in the state of solid solution, which is established by the methods of internal friction and electrical resistance;

– based on internal friction data, the activation energies of relaxation processes of impurity oxygen 0.91 – 1.04 eV and nitrogen 1.46 – 1.63 eV were determined for all the studied vanadium-iron alloys; and

– the formation of an iron-oxygen complex with an activation energy of 1.17 eV and a binding energy of 0.07 eV was revealed.

### References

1. Kurtz R.J., Abe K., Chernov V.M. et all.Recent Progress on Development of Vanadium Alloys for Fusion. J. Nucl. Mater. 2004, v. 329-333, pp. 47-55.
2. Kazakov V.A., Chakin V.P., Goncharenko Yu,D. Tensile Properties and Fracture Behaviour of V-Cr-Ti Alloys after Neutron Irradiation at 330°C. J. Nucl. Mater. 1998, v. 258-263, pp. 1492-1496.
3. Dediurin A.I., Platov Y.M., Zakharova M.I., Borovitskaja I.V., Artemov N.A. Effect of Neutron Irradiation on Swelling, Elastic Modulus and Thermal Conductivity of V-Ga Alloys. J. Nucl. Mater. 1998, v. 258-263, pp. 1409-1413.
4. Borovitskaya I.V., Ivanov L.I., Zakharova M.I., Dedyurin A.I., Artemov N.A. Influence of Alloying and Irradiation on the Behavior of Impurities in Vanadium and Alloys of V-Ga and V-Ti-Cr Systems. Metals. 2008, no. 3, pp. 68-74 (in Russian).
5. Zakharova M.I. Tarasikov V.P. Thermal Stability of Radiation Effects in Monocrystalline Vanadium. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2018, iss. 4(95), pp. 4-15 (in Russian).
6. Birzhevoy G.A., Zakharova M.I., Tarasikov V.P. Studies of the Formation of Complexes of Atoms of Implementation – Substitution into Ferritic-Martensitic Steel EP-823 at Different Heat Treatment. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2019, iss. 2(98), pp. 4-11 (in Russian).
7. Lang Е. Bressers J. The Effect Oxygen Doping on the Electrical Resistivity of Vanadium. Z. fur Metallkunde. 1975, v. 66, no.10, pp. 619-624.
8. Arbuzov V.L., Goschitsky B.N., Danilov S.E., Chernov V.M. Interaction of Radiation Defects with Impurity Introduction in Vanadium. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2016, iss. 1(84), pp. 17-25 (in Russian).
9. Yu L.M., Yin F.X. Internal Friction of Niobium-Titanium-Oxygen Alloys. Journal of Materials Science. 2007, v. 42, pp. 7819-7826.