+++

categories="article"
date="2020-09-16T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2020-03"
issue_name="2020 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="15"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/03/15.pdf"
first_page="148"
last_page="159"
udc="621.039, 53.05, 53.043"
title="Experimental confirmation of a new method for selective neutron separation"
original_title="Экспериментальное подтверждение селективной сепарации нейтронов"
authors=["DrobyshevskyYuV", "AnfimovIM", "VarlachevVA", "KobelevaSP", "NekrasovSA", "StolbovSN"]
tags=["thermal neutrons", "neutron flux density", "thermal neutron beams", "elliptical mirror", "method and apparatus for investigation thermal neutron beams", "neutron transmutation", "silicon"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.15"

+++

The article presents an experimental confirmation of the operability of neutron concentrators in devices that form and use directed high-intensity thermal neutron beams with elliptical channels made as blocks of profiled graphite and aluminum plates. The effect of neutron reflection from the surface of materials is the basis of a device capable of selecting neutrons by their directions in space. The study experimentally confirmed the efficiency of a moderating-focusing structure (MFS) based on a pack of elliptical neutron mirrors, which makes it possible to form oriented thermal neutron beams from the outgoing neutron flux. To record the effects of selective thermal neutron separation, silicon single-crystal wafers were used, due to which it was possible to obtain portraits of integral neutron fluxes in the reactor. The experiments were carried out in a horizontal experimental channel (HEC-4) at the IRT-T reactor of the National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University. The integral neutron flux was (2.3 – 3.02)·1017 cm–2. The neutron flux was detected by the change in the specific electrical resistivity of the single-crystal silicon wafers. The effect of concentration of thermal neutrons was recorded both on the block of graphite neutron mirrors and on the block of aluminum thin-walled elliptical mirrors. In the near future, on this basis, it will be possible to solve such problems as extending the reactor life by reducing the hydrogen uptake in the inner walls. In addition, the experiments have proved the possibility of creating anisotropic structures that lie outside the formalism of Liouville’s theorem, in which the surfaces of thermal neutron sinks are formed with subsequent concentration in the areas separated by aluminum or graphite plates.

### References

1. Kim Y.H., Park H., Kim Y.K., Kim J., Kang J. Reference thermal neutron field at KRISS for calibration of neutron detectors. Radiation Measurements. 2017, v. 107, pp. 73-79. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016 / j. radmeas.2017.10.001 .
2. Lehmann E., Trtik P., Ridikas D. Status and perspectives of neutron imaging facilities, Neutron imaging for applications in industry and science. Physics Procedia. 2017, v. 88, pp. 140-147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016 / j. phpro.2017.06.019 .
3. Boffy R., Beaucour J., Bermejo F.J. A Versatile Device for Thermal Neutron Irradiation of Materials at Grazing Incidence Angles. Nuclear Technology. 2017, v. 200, no. 1, pp. 54-65. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080 / 00295450.2017.1341780 .
4. Varlachev V.A., Zenkov A.G., Solodovnikov E.S. Features of Neutron Transmutation Doping of Silicon at a Research Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 1998, no. 4, pp. 210-215 (in Russian).
5. Varlachev V.A., Solodovnikov E.S.A Thermal Neutron Detector Based on Single-Crystalline Silicon. Instruments and Experimental Techniques. 2009, v. 52, no. 3, pp. 342-344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0020441209030063 .
6. Drobyshevskij Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. Device for the Formation of a Directed Neutron Flux. Patent RU №1821818, 1990 (in Russian).
7. Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Drobyshevskij Yu.V. Registration of Selective Separation Effect of Thermal Neutrons: Substantiation, Experiments. VANT. Ser. Fizika radiacionnogo vozdejstviya na radioelektronnuyu apparaturu. 2018, no. 1, pp. 24-30 (in Russian).
8. Anfimov I.M., Drobyshevskij Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. Registration of Selective Separation Effect of Thermal Neutrons. Izvestiya Instituta Inzhenernoj Fiziki. 2018, v. 3, no. 49, pp. 21-26 (in Russian).
9. Drobyshevskij Yu.V., Dunilin V.M., Volkov G.G., Stolbov S.N. Reactor Neutroinos, Neutron Structure and Space-Time Geometry. Izvestiya Instituta Inzhenernoj Fiziki. 2017, no. 3, pp.17-28 (in Russian).
10. Varlachev V.A., Zenkov A.G., Solodovnikov E.S. Features of Neutron Transmutation Doping of Silicon at a Research Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 1998, no. 4, pp. 210-215 (in Russian).
11. Varlachev V.A., Solodovnikov E.S. Improving the Efficiency of Using Neutrons with Uniform Irradiation of Samples of Large Lengths. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 2010, v. 53, no. 10-2, pp. 313-316 (in Russian).
12. Drobyshevskij Yu.V., Stolbov S.N., Nekrasov S.A., Petrov G.N., Prohorov A.K. Method and Device for Neutron Doping of a Substance. Patent RU №2514943, 2012 (in Russian).
13. Badretdinov T.H., Goryunov A.G., Varlachev V.A. On the Issue of Upgrading the Complex for Neutron Doping of Silicon at IRT-T. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedenij. Yadernaya Energetika. 2010, no. 3, pp. 147-151 (in Russian).
14. Solov’eva A.P., Ul’yanin Yu.A., Haritonov V.V., Yurshina D.Yu. On the Value of Spent Nuclear Fuel as a Feedstock for Thermal Reactors’ Fuel. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2. pp. 140-152. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.12 (in Russian).
15. Vatulin A.V., Suprun V.B., Kulakov G.V. Development of Fuel for Research Reactors. Atomnaya Energiya. 2015, v. 119, no. 5, pp. 249-254 (in Russian).
16. Fischer V., Pagani L., Pickard L., Grant C., He J., Pantic E., Svoboda R., Ullmann J., Wang J. Absolute calibration of the DANCE thermal neutron beam using sodium activation. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research. Section A, Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment. 2019, v. 929, iss. C, ID: ISSN 0168-9002. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. nima.2019.03.047 .
17. Al Zain Jamal, El Hajjaji O., El Bardouni T., Boukha H. Deterministic evaluation of safety parameters and neutron flux spectra in the MNSR research reactor using DRAGON-4 code. Journal of Radiation Research and Applied Sciences. 2018, v. 11, iss. 3, pp. 255-261. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jrras.2018.04.002 .
18. Kerlin Thomas W., Belle R. Dynamics and Control of Nuclear Reactors. Elsevier Science, Upadhyaya, Academic Press, 2019. 402 p.