+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:28:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/02.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.02"
first_page="19"
last_page="29"
udc="621.039.58:532.77"
rubric="nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name="Nuclear power plants"
title="Experimental Research of the Properties of Concentrated Solutions of Boric Acid in Application to Cooling of VVER Reactors"
original_title="Экспериментальное исследование свойств концентрированных растворов борной кислоты применительно к охлаждению реакторных установок ВВЭР"
authors=["LebezovAA", "MorozovAV", "SahipgareevAR", "SoshkinaAS", "ShlepkinAS"]
tags=["VVER", "boric acid", "emergency modes", "thermophysical properties", "passive safety systems"]

+++

The article presents the results of an experimental study of the thermophysical properties of aqueous solutions of boric acid with the addition of potassium hydroxide added to the VVER coolant as a corrective additive to maintain the required pH value of the primary circuit medium.

The parameters were measured at pressure P=0.1 MPa in the temperature range 25– 90°C in the following ranges of H3BO3 concentrations in solutions: density – 2.5 – 230 g/kg H2O, viscosity – 2.5 – 100 g/kg H2O, surface tension – 2.5 – 150 g/kg H2O.
Such a high concentration of boric acid is achieved in the VVER core in the event of large break loss of coolant accident and simultaneous failure of emergency power supplies.
At the same time, cooling of the core is ensured through the operation of passive safety systems, which must ensure the supply of a boric acid solution with a concentration of 16 – 20 g/kg into the core.

The main experimental equipment and research methodology are described.
The dependencies of thermophysical properties of solutions on the concentration of boric acid in them based on the processing of experimental data were obtained.
Peculiarities of changes in the surface tension of H3BO3 with changes in the concentration and increase in temperature of a solution of boric acid with a corrective addition of potassium hydroxide have been revealed.

The results of the conducted research make it possible to expand the range of known properties of aqueous solutions of boric acid and are of great practical importance for nuclear power plants with new generation VVER reactors.
The experimental data obtained can be used to clarify the results of calculations of emergency processes in a VVER reactor plant during the operation of a complex of passive safety systems, including a passive core flooding system, a passive heat removal system from the steam generator, and a system of third-stage hydraulic accumulators.


### References

1. Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V. An experimental substantiation of the design functions imposed on the additional system for passively flooding the core of a VVER reactor. Thermal Engineering. 2012, vol. 59, pp. 365 – 370. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601512050096
2.MorozovA.V.,SorokinA.P.,RagulinS.V.,PitykA.V.,SahipgareevA.R.,SoshkinaA.S.,ShlepkinA.S.Influence of boric acid mass transfer processes on its accumulation in the core during emergency conditions of NPPs with VVER. Teploenergetika. 2017, no. 7, pp. 33 – 38 (in Russian).
3. Abdulagatov I.M., Azizov N.D. Densities and Apparent Molar Volumes of Aqueous H3BO3 Solutions at Temperatures from 296 to 573 K and at Pressures up to 48 MPa. Journal of Solution Chemistry. 2004, v. 33,iss. 10, pp. 1305 – 1331. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10953-004-7142-2
4. Alavia W., Lovera J.A., Cortez B.A., Graber T.A. Solubility, Density, Refractive Index, Viscosity, and Electrical Conductivity of Boric Acid + Lithium Sulfate + Water System at (293.15, 298.15, 303.15, 308.15 and 313.15) K. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data. 2013, v.58, iss. 6, pp. 1668 – 1674. DOI: https:// doi.org/10.1021/je400086a
5. Byers W.A., Brown W.L., Kellerman B.E., Shearer K.S., Fink D.J. Summary of Tests to Determine the Physical Properties of Buffered and Un-buffered Boric Acid Solutions. WCAP-17021-NP. Revision 1. Westinghouse Electric Company, 2010, 46 p. Available at: https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML1122/ ML11220A169.pdf (accessed Jan. 12, 2024).
6. Santarao K., Prasad C.L.V.R.S.V., Swami Naidu G. Experimental investigation to study the viscosity and dispersion of conductive and non-conductive nanopowders’ blended dielectrics. Advances in Science and Technology Research Journal. 2017, v. 11, iss. 1, pp. 154 – 160. DOI: 10.12913/22998624/68463
7. Hassan Y.A., Osturk S., Lee S. Rheological characterization of buffered boric acid aqueous solutions in light water reactors. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2015, v. 85, pp. 239 – 253. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. pnucene.2015.06.025
8. Arias F.J. Boron dilution effect on boiling heat transfer with special reference to nuclear reactors technology. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2009, v. 36, iss. 9, pp. 1382 – 1385. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. anucene.2009.06.018
9. Nakath R., Schuster Ch., Hurtado A. Bubble size distribution in flow boiling of aqueous boric acid under high pressure. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2013, v. 262, pp. 562-570. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. nucengdes.2013.06.006
10. Styrikovich M.A., Tshvirashvili D.G., Nebieridze D.P. Study of the solubility of boric acid in saturated water vapor. Dokl. AN USSR. 1960, v. 134, no. 3, pp. 615 – 617 (in Russian).
11. Tshvirashvili D.G., Galustashvili V.V. Behavior of borates and boric acid in boiling water reactors. Atomnayaj energiya. 1964, v. 16, iss. 1, pp. 65 – 67 (in Russian).
12. Böhlkea S., Schustera C., Hurtado A. About the volatility of boron in aqueous solutions of borates with vapour in relevance to BWR-Reactors. Proc. of International Conference on the Physics of Reactors, Interlaken, Sep. 14-19, 2008, vol. 4, pp. 3089 – 3096.
13. Tuunanen J., Tuomisto J., Raussi P. Experimental and analytical studies of boric acid concentrations in a VVER-440 reactor during the long-term cooling period of loss-of-coolant accidents. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1994, v. 148, iss. 2-3, pp. 217 – 231. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0029-5493(94)90111-2
14. Pityk A.V., Morozov A.V., Shlepkin A.S., Sahipgareev A.R. Experimental study of the solubility of boric acid in boiling steam at atmospheric pressure. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 1, pp. 30 – 40. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.03 (in Russian).
15. Morozov A.V., Shlepkin A.S., Sahipgareev A.R. Experimental modeling of the crystallization process of boric acid during emergency cooling of the core of a nuclear power plant with VVER. Proc. of the All-Russian Conference with Elements of a Scientific School for Young Scientists «XXXV Siberian Thermophysical Seminar». Novosibirsk. IT SB RAS Publ., 2019, p. 223 (in Russian).
16. Morozov A.V., Pityk A.V., Sahipgareev A.R., Shlepkin A.S.Thermophysical properties of aqueous solutions of boric acid in a wide range of concentrations. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Ser.: Nuclear Reactor Constants. 2018, no. 3, pp. 102 – 114 (in Russian).
17. Sahipgareev A.R., Morozov A.V. Study of the thermophysical and physicochemical properties of boric acid solutions in relation to emergency cooling of the VVER core. Proc. of the IV All-Russian Scientific Conference with Elements of a School of Young Scientists «Thermophysics and physical hydrodynamics». Novosibirsk. IT SB RAS Publ., 2019, p. 202 (in Russian).
18. Sakhipgareev A.S., Shlepkin A.S., Morozov A.V. Experimental study of the surface tension of highly concentrated boric acid solutions applicable to VVER emergency cooling. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2020, Vol. 1675, 012097. DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/1675/1/012097
19. Morozov A.V., Pityk A.V., Ragulin S.V., Sahipgareev A.R., Soshkina A.S., Shlepkin A.S. Estimation of influence of boric acid drop entrainment to its accumulation in the WWER reactor in the case of accident. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 4, pp. 72–82. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/ npe.2017.4.07 (in Russian).

