+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:26:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/04.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.04"
first_page="41"
last_page="58"
udc="536.24+621.039.553.34"
rubric="thermalphysics"
rubric_name="Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
title="Actual Problems of Thermal-Hydraulic Modelling in Fast Neutron Reactors"
original_title="Актуальные вопросы моделирования теплогидравлических процессов в реакторах на быстрых нейтронах"
authors=["KuzinaJuA", "SorokinAP"]
tags=["fast reactor", "reactor tank", "fuel rod assemblies", "hydrodynamics", "heat transfer", "experiment", "computational modelling", "turbulent transfer", "interchannel exchange", "coolant temperature stratification", "boiling regimes", "roughness", "two-fluid model"]

+++

The results of studies of hydrodynamics and heat transfer processes in fast neutron reactors are presented. Data on turbulent momentum transfer in rod bundles are analyzed.
It is shown that the intensification of turbulent momentum transfer in the rod bundle channels is due to large-scale turbulent momentum transfer (secondary currents).
The intensification of interchannel turbulent exchange in close lattices of rods is explained.
A dependence is obtained for the dissimilarity coefficients of interchannel convective exchange forced by wire winding in bundles of rods.
The methods and results of numerical modelling of thermal hydraulics using the Monte Carlo method, thermomechanical analysis of the temperature field in fuel rod assemblies during the campaign are presented.
The results of modelling on a water model of temperature fields and the structure of coolant movement in the primary circuit of the reactor in various regimes are presented.
A stable temperature stratification of the coolant was revealed in the peripheral zone of the upper chamber of the reactor above the side screens.
It is shown that the process of boiling liquid metals in fuel assemblies has a complex structure, characterized by stable and pulsating regimes and a heat transfer crisis.
The agreement between the results of experimental and numerical modelling is shown.
A cartogram of the flow regimes of a two-phase flow of liquid metals in fuel rod assemblies has been constructed.
The influence of the surface roughness of fuel elements on the boiling process and heat transfer during boiling of liquid metals is analyzed.
Long-term cooling of a fuel assembly with a «sodium cavity» above the reactor core in accident regimes with boiling of liquid metals is shown.
The objectives of further research are formulated.

### References

1. Thermophysical bench base of the nuclear power industry in Russia and Kazakhstan (Ed. Pershukov V.A., Arkhangelsky A.V., Kononov O.E., Sorokin A.P.). Sarov, Federal State Unitary Enterprise «RFNC – VNIIEF», 2016, 160 p.
2. Efanov A.D., Kozlov F.A., Rachkov V.I., Sorokin A.P., Chernonog V.L. Scientific school of the State Scientific Center of the Russian Federation – IPPE «Heat and mass transfer, physical chemistry and technology of heat carriers in power systems». Scientific and technical collection «Results of scientific and technical activities of the Institute of Nuclear Reactors and Thermal Physics for 2014» under the general editorship of A.P. Sorokin, A.A. Trufanov, T.N. Vereshchagina. Obninsk, IPPE JSC, 2015, pp. 24 – 51.
3. Sorokin A.P, Kuzina Yu.A. Physical modeling of hydrodynamic and heat transfer process in NPP with liquid metal cooling. Thermal Engineering. 2019, vol. 66, pp. 533–542. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/ S0040601519080093
4. Rachkov V.I., Arnol’Dov M.N., Efanov A.D., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Loginov N.I., Orlov Y.I., Sorokin A.P. Use of liquid metals in nuclear and thermonuclear engineering, and in other innovative technologies. Thermal Engineering. 2014, vol. 61, pp. 337 – 347. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601514050085
5. Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N. Two-component nuclear power system with a closed nuclear fuel cycle based on BN and VVER. Atomic Energy. 2016, vol. 120, iss. 4, pp. 233–239. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10512-016-0123-x
6. Subbotin V.I., Ibragimov M.Kh., Ushakov P.A., Bobkov V.P., Zhukov A.V., Yuriev Yu.S. Hydrodynamics and heat transfer in nuclear power plants (bases of calculation). Moscow. Atomizdat, 1975, 406 p.
7. Ibragimov M.Kh., Subbotin V.I., Bobkov V.P., Sabelev G.I., Taranov G.S. The structure of turbulent flow and the mechanism of heat transfer in channels. Moscow. Atomizdat, 1978, 296 р.
8. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A., Denisova N.A. Hydrodynamics of turbulent flows in fuel assemblies of fast reactors (velocity field and turbulence microstructure). Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Ser.: Nuclear Reactor Constants. 2021, no. 2, pp. 139 – 166. DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2021-2-139-166 (in Russian).
9. Nijsing R., Eifler W. Temperature Fields in Liquid-Metal-Cooled Rod Assemblies. Progress in Heat and Mass Transfer. 1971, vol. 7, pp. 115 – 149.
10. Zhukov A.V., Sorokin A.P., Ushakov P.A., Matyukhin N.M., Tikhomirov B.B., Titov P.A., Mikhin V.I., Mantlik F., Geina Y., Vosaglo L., Chervenka Ya. Hydrodynamic characteristics in fuel assemblies of fast reactors. Preprint FEI-1816, Obninsk, 1986, 68 p. (in Russian).
11. Mühlbauer P. et al. Finite Element Analysis of Turbulent Flow on Infinite Rod Bundles. Fourth Int. Top. Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal-Hydraulics, NURETH-4. Karlsruhe, 1989, vol. 2, pp. 1307 – 1312.
12. Yang A., Jiang S. Turbulent transfer of heat and momentum in an infinite lattice of rods. Heat transfer. 1988, no. 2, pp. 36 – 43.
13. Neelen N. Modeling of Transport of Momentum in Parallel Turbulent Flow through a Rod Bundle. DrIng, Thesis, TU Braunschweig, Germany, 1986.
14. Shimizu Т., Hinokata Н., Shishido Н. Distributed Parameter Analysis for the Prediction on the Pine Structure of Flow and Temperature Fields in Wire-Wrapped Fuel Pin Bundle Geometrics. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1990, vol. 120, iss. 2 – 3, pp. 369 – 383. DIO: https://doi.org/10.1016/0029-5493(90)90387-D
15. Reichardt H. Vollständige Darstellung der Turbulenten Geschwindigkeitsvertelung in Glatten Leitungen. Z. Hath. and Mech. 1951, vol. 31, iss.7, pp. 208 – 219. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/zamm.19510310704
16. Kjellstrom В. Studies of Turbulent Flow Parallel to Rod Bundles of Triangular Array. Aktiebolaget Atomenergi. 1974, Report AE-487, 191 p. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/05/148/5148715.pdf (accessed Mar.15, 2024).
17. Ramm H., Johannsen K. Prediction of Local and Integral Turbulent Transport Properties for Liquid-Metal Heat Transfer in Equilateral Triangular Rod Arrays. Journal of Heat Transfer. 1975, vol. 97, ser. C, no 2, pp. 238 – 245. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3450347
18. Launder B.E., Spalding D.B. The Numerical Computation оf Turbulent Flows. Computation Methods App. Mech. Engrg. 1974, vol. 3, iss. 2, pp. 269 – 289. https://doi.org/10.1016/0045-7825(74)90029-2
19. Nijsing R. et al. Temperature Fields in Liquid-Metal Cooled Rod Assemblies. Report on the International Heat Transfer Seminar. Trogir, Yugoslavia, 1971, EU/C-1C791/71.
20. Buleev N.I., Zinina G.A. Correction of the initial hypotheses of the three-dimensional model of turbulent exchange. Questions of Atomic Science and Technology. Ser.: Physics and technology of nuclear reactors. 1981, iss. 2 (24), pp. 26 – 35 (in Russian).
21. Rowe D.S., Chapman С.С. Measurement of Turbulent Velocity, Intensity and Scale in Rod Bundle Plow Channels Containing a Grid Spacer. BNWL–1737, Washington, 1973.
22. Zhukov A.V., Kuzina Yu.A., Sorokin A.P. Analysis of the benchmark experiment on hydraulics and heat transfer in the assembly of fuel rod simulators with liquid metal cooling. Atomic Energy. 2005, vol. 99, iss. 5, pp. 770 – 781. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-006-0015-6
23. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A., Sorokin G.A., Denisova N.A. Modeling of heat and mass transfer processes in fuel assemblies of fast reactors within the framework of the channel-by-channel calculation method. Generalized exchange characteristics for single-phase flows of liquid metals. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Ser.: Nuclear Reactor Constants. 2020, no. 2, pp. 104–130. DOI: https://doi. org/10.55176/2414-1038-2020-2-104-130 (in Russian).
24. Zhukov A.V., Sorokin A.P., Titov P.A., Ushakov P.A. Analysis of the hydraulic resistance of fast reactor fuel rod bundles. Atomic Energy. 1986, vol. 60, iss. 5, pp. 317 – 321. Available at: https://elib.biblioatom.ru/ text/atomnaya-energiya_t60-5_1986/p317/ (accessed Mar.15, 2024) (in Russian).
25. Kirillov P.L. Heat transfer in turbulent flow. Part 2. Velocity and Temperature Distribution. Atomic Energy. 2017, vol. 122, iss. 4. pp. 230 – 242. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0261-9
26. Bogoslovkaya G.P., Cevolani S., Ninokata H., Rinejski A.A., Sorokin A.P., Zhukov A.V. LMFR Core and Heat Exchanger Thermohydraulic Design: Former USSR and Present Russia Approaches. IAEA–TEC-DOC–1060. Vienna, IAEA, 1999, 305 p.
27. Zhukov A.V., Sorokin A.P., Matyukhin N.M. Interchannel exchange in fuel assemblies of fast reactors (calculation programs and practical application). Series: Physics and technology of nuclear reactors. Iss. 38. Moscow. Energoatomizdat, 1991, 225 p. (in Russian).
28. Gordeev S.S., Sorokin A.P., Tikhomirov B.B., Trufanov A.A., Denisova N.A. Method of calculation of temperature regimes for fuel elements in the fuel subassembly into account inter-channel mixing of the coolant and random deviation of the parameters. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Ser. Nuclear Reactor Constants. 2016, iss 4, pp. 116–130. Available at: http://vant.ippe.ru/archiv/year2016. html (accessed Mar.15, 2024) (in Russian).
29. Kuzina Yu.A., Sorokin A.P., Denisova N.A. Experimental and calculation investigations of hydrodynamics and heat exchange in liquid metal turbulent flows in fast reactor fuel assemblies. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Series: Nuclear Reactor Constants, 2023, no. 2, pp. 132–145. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2023/2/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/2328-10.html (accessed Mar.15, 2024) (in Russian).
30. Sorokin A.P., Bogoslovskaya G.P., Trufanov A.A., Denisova N.A. Investigation of the effect of FA radiation deformation on the temperature regime and the stress-strain state of the fuel cladding. Atomic Energy. 2016, vol. 120, iss. 6, pp. 418 – 425. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0151-6
31. Opanasenko A.N., Sorokin A.P., Zaryugin D.G., Trufanov A.A. Fast Reactor: an Experimental Study of Thermohydraulic Processes in Different Operating Regimes. Thermal Engineering. 2017, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 336 – 344. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601517050056
32. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A., Ivanov E.F. Peculiarities of heat transfer during liquid metal boiling in fuel assemblies of fast reactors. Atomic Energy. 2019, vol. 126, iss. 2, pp. 73–82. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10512-019-00518-0
33. Yamaguchi K. Flow Pattern and Dryout under Sodium Boiling Conditions. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1987, vol. 99, no. 3, pp. 247 – 263. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0029-5493(87)90125-7
34. Sorokin G.A., Ninokata H., Sorokin A.P., Endo H., Ivanov Eu.F. Numerical Study of Liquid Metal Boiling in the System of Parallel Bundles under Natural Circulation. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2006, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 623 – 634. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2006.9711142

