+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/08.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.08"
first_page="93"
last_page="103"
udc="621.039.5"
rubric="safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
title="Computational Analysis of Large Water-to-Sodium Leak Incident in the BN-600 Steam Generator"
original_title="Расчетный анализ инцидента с большой течью воды в натрий в парогенераторе РУ БН-600"
authors=["PerevoznikovSV", "MikhinSA", "KamaevAA", "PazinGN", "MirzeabasovOA", "MyazdrikovaOI", "BorisovVV", "PakhomovIA"]
tags=["sodium coolant", "sodium-water steam generator", "steam generator protection system", "water leaks into sodium", "control system for small leaks", "large leaks"]

+++

The paper presents the results comparing the calculated data with the indications of water- to-sodium leak detection system and hydrodynamic parameters in the second sodium circuit, observed during the water-to-sodium leak incident in the superheater module of the BN-600 unit on January 19, 1982.

It should be noted that the reconstruction of these events in was mostly performed based on post-accident analysis data, which is rather desultory and does not describe the occurring processes accurately enough.
However, this reconstruction can be used for the comparative analysis.

The calculations were performed using two codes designed to analyze the efficiency of the steam generator protection system in case of small leaks (SLEAK code) and the secondary circuit protection system against overpressure in case of large leaks (LLEAK-3C 1.0 code).
The use of two calculation codes made it possible to simulate the operation of the BN-600 steam generator protection system in case of water leak in the steam generator, taking into account its leak.

Good agreement between the calculations results and post-accident analysis data was obtained.

The results of computational modeling of a real incident confirm the adequacy of physical and mathematical models, implementation of SLEAK and LLEAK-3C 1.0 codes.

### References

1. Ashurko Y.M., Baklushin R.P., Zagorulko Y.I., Ivanenko V.N., Matveyev V.P., Vasiliyev B.A. Fast reactor operating experience gained in Russia: analysis of anomalies and abnormal operation cases. Unusual occurrences during LMFR OPERATION. IAEA-TECDOC-1180, IAEA, VIENNA, 2000, pp. 117–144. ISSN 1011-4289.
2. Perevoznikov S.V., Myazdrikova O.I., Pakhomov I.A. Certificate of state registration of the computer program SLEAK No. 2018661619. Russian Federation, 2018 (in Russian).
3. Perevoznikov S.V., Shvetsov Y.E., Pazin G.N., Mirzeabasov O.A., Myazdrikova O.I. Certificate of state registration of the computer program) LLEAK-3C 1.0 No. 2020662541. Russian Federation, 2020 (in Russian).
4. Kozlov F.A., Kuznetsov E.K., Sergeev G.P., Volchkov L.G. Operation of a steam generator with sodium and water and secondary circuit with small flows of water into sodium. Proc. of Institute of Physics and Power Engineering. Moscow, Atomizdat, 1974, pp. 120 – 135 (in Russian).
5. Kuznetsov I.A., Poplavskiy V.M. Safety of nuclear power plants with fast reactors. Moscow, IzDAT, 2012, 632 p. ISBN 978-5-86656-257-2 (in Russian).
6. Perevoznikov S.V., Shvetsov Y.E., Kamaev A.A., Pakhomov I.A., Borisov V.V., Pazin G.N., Mirzeabasov O.A., Korzun O.I. Modeling of hydrodynamic processes at a large leak of water into sodium in the fast reactor coolant circuit. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2016, v. 48, no. 5, pp. 1162 – 1173. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1016/j.net.2016.04.010
