+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/09.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.09"
first_page="104"
last_page="111"
udc="621.039.531"
rubric="materials"
rubric_name="Nuclear materials"
title="Interaction of Substitutional and Interstitial Atoms with each other, and with Radiation  Defects in Alloys V−Fе under Irradiation with Fast Neutrons"
original_title="Взаимодействие атомов замещения и внедрения между собой и с радиационными дефектами в сплавах V−Fе при облучении быстрыми нейтронами"
authors=["ZakharovaMI", "TarasikovVP"]
tags=["сплавы V−Fe", "нейтронное облучение", "радиационные дефекты", "фазовые превращения", "вакансии", "междоузельные атомы", "дислокации", "поры", "внутреннее трение", "электросопротивление"]

+++

The paper presents the results of studies of V−Fe alloys irradiated with fast neutrons and obtained using internal friction and electrical resistance.
The studies were conducted in order to clarify the effect of radiation-stimulated phase transformations, decay of substitutional and interstitial solid solutions, and radiation-induced iron segregation on vacancy swelling during isochronous annealing.
To study the processes occurring during isochronous annealing in the V−Fe system, an alloy V + 0.65 at.% Fe was selected.
This choice is due to the fact that, comparing to other alloys, the maximum number of Fe atoms − 0.54 at.% − come out of the solid solution of this alloy during irradiation, which makes up 83% relative to the original composition.

A feature of the restoration of the electrical resistance of the alloy V + 0.65 at.% Fe is the presence of peaks of an abrupt change in the value of electrical resistance in the temperature range of 400−1000°C.
In an alloy V+0.65 at.% of Fe irradiated with neutrons up to 1.4 dpa at a temperature of 400°C, during isochronous annealing in the temperature range of 100−300°C after 100°C for 1 hour at a residual pressure of no more than 7×10–4 Pa, a migration of Fe atoms is observed throughout the temperature range: during annealing up to 500°C, the decay of a significant part of radiation-induced segregation and reconstitution of solid substitution solution is observed; in the range of 500–600°C the number of Fe atoms in solid solution decreases by about 50%, i.e. Fe atoms again segregate on defects that are stable in this temperature range.
Such changes persist up to 1000°C; in the temperature range from 1000−1300°C, the solid solution contains about 0.30 at.% Fe.

The change in the electrical resistance of the irradiated alloy caused by the migration of Fe atoms in the matrix V is determined.


### References


1. Votinov S.N., Gomozov L.I., Dedyurin A.I., Zavyalsky L.P. Features of vanadium alloys as low-activation materials for thermonuclear reactors. VANT. Ser. Thermonuclear fusion. 1989, vol. 3, pp. 49 (in Russian).
2. Loomis B.A., Hull A.B., Smith D.L. Evaluation of lowactivation vanadium alloys for use as structural material in fusion reactors. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1991, v. 179–181, pp. 148–154.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(91)90030-B
3. Chen J.M., Chernov V.M., Kurtz R.J., Muroga T. Overview of the vanadium alloy researches for fusion reactors. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2011, Vol. 417(1–3), P. 289–294.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnucmat.2011.02.015
4. Chernov V.M. Low-activation structural materials for nuclear reactors – problems and the way forward. Materials of nuclear technology: collection of abstracts of reports of a scientific and technical conference. Moscow, JSC «VNIINM» Publ., 2023, pp. 80–81. ISBN 978-5-6048666-3–4 (in Russian).
5. Zakharova M.I., Tarasikov V.P. The influence of neutron irradiation on the properties of vanadium-iron alloys. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2022, no. 4, pp. 78–88.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.4.07 (in Russian).
6. Zakharova M.I., Artemov N.A. Internal Friction as a Method for Studying the Recovery Stages of Radiation Damage in BCC Refractory Metals. Proc. 9th. Intern. Conf. on Internal Friction and Ul-trasonic Attenuation in Solids. China, 1990, pp.617–621.
7. Zakharova M.I., Tarasikov V.P. Study of alloys of the V−Fe system using internal friction and electrical resistance methods. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 3, pp. 108–116. DOI: https://doi. org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.11 (in Russian).
8. Porollo S.I., Dvoryashin A.M., Konobeev Y.V. Radiation damage in neutron-irradiated V-Fe alloys. Physics of metals and metallography. 2022, vol. 123, pp. 784–790.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0031918X22080075
9. Zakharova M.I. Tarasikov V.P. Thermal stability of radiation effects in single-crystal vanadium. VANT. Ser.: Materials science and new materials. 2018, iss. 4(95), pp. 4–15 (in Russian).
10. Fedorov G.B., Smirnov E.A., Zhomov F.I., Ivanov N.V. Self-diffusion and diffusion of impurities in vanadium. Materials of Atomic Engineering. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975, iss.1. pp .19–25 (in Russian).
11. Lang E., Bressers J. The effect of oxygen doping on the electrical resistivity of vanadium. Zeitschrift fur Metal1-Kunde. 1975, v.66, no. 10, pp. 619–624. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/ijmr-1975-661011
12. Blanter M.S., Piguzov Yu.I., Ashmarin G.M. et al. Method of internal friction in metallurgical research: Reference publication. Moscow. Metallurgy Publ., 1991, 248 p. (in Russian).
13. Bogdanov V.V., Zakurkin V.V. Radiation-induced segregation in neutron-irradiated V-Fe alloys studied by Mössbauer spectroscopy. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1996, vol. 231, iss. 1–2, pp.162–164. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(96)00357-1
14. Arbuzov V.L., Goshchitsky B.N., Danilov S.E., Chernov V.M. Interaction of radiation defects with interstitial impurities in vanadium. VANT. Cer.: Materials science and new materials. 2016, iss. 1 (84), pp. 17–25 (in Russian).
