+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/10.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.10"
first_page="112"
last_page="126"
udc="621.039.534"
rubric="coolants"
rubric_name="Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
title="Calculation Analysis of the Impurity Contents in the Products of Water with Sodium Interaction"
original_title="Расчетное обоснование компонентного состава примесей при взаимодействии воды с натрием"
authors=["AlekseevVV", "BorisovVV", "KamaevAA", "GanichevNS"]
tags=["sodium", "water", "oxygen", "hydrogen bubbles", "dissolution", "concentration", "reaction components", "saturation", "alkali", "temperature", "equilibrium system", "steam generator"]

+++

A method has been developed for calculating the component composition of the reaction products of water with sodium in sodium.
It is accepted that the concentrations of components in the resulting nonequilibrium system are redistributed in accordance with the law of mass action.
The change in the equilibrium composition of the sodium-oxygen-hydrogen system is calculated as a result of changes in sodium temperature and the concentration of incoming water during its dilution in the sodium flow.

At low concentrations of water in sodium, the sodium temperature has virtually no effect on the distribution of reaction components.
The effect of temperature begins to manifest itself noticeably at a water concentration in sodium of more than 100 ppm.
As the concentration of water in sodium increases at a temperature of 500°C, the predominant components are alkali and sodium hydride.

It has been shown that the distribution of concentrations of the components of the sodium-water reaction in sodium along the length of the tube bundle is mainly affected by the dilution of the solution and insignificantly by the operating mode of the steam generator (isothermal or non-isothermal).

The results obtained confirm the possibility of conducting studies of the spatial distribution of components of the sodium-water reaction in the inter-tube space of steam generators using isothermal models.

A model for the dissolution of hydrogen bubbles in a sodium flow is proposed and estimates are made of the dissolution time of hydrogen bubbles during sodium flow in the annulus space of the N-532 steam generator.
For a 10 mm bubble, a dissolution time of about 1.6 s was obtained.

A calculation was made of the change in the concentration of the components of the sodium-water reaction in sodium along the length of the steam generator, taking into account the formation and dissolution of hydrogen bubbles.
The proportion of sodium hydride formed as a result of the dissolution of hydrogen bubbles, for the conditions under consideration (50% of water goes to the formation of hydrogen), approaches 30% of its total content in sodium.

The influence of the formation of alkali suspensions during the interaction of water with sodium on the calculation of the component composition of reaction products in sodium is considered.
The values of increments in the concentrations of oxygen and hydrogen in the sodium flow are calculated depending on the magnitude of the water leak and the sodium temperature.
The data obtained can be used to analyze the operation of the emergency protection system of sodium-water steam generators.


### References

1. Shikhov B.A. System NaOH+2 Na = Na2O+NaH. Russian Journal of Inorganic Chemistry. 1967, vol. 12, iss. 4, pp. 545 – 548 (in Russian).
2. Mitkevich E.M., Shikhov B.A. Study of the system NaOH+2 Na = Na2O+NaH. Russian Journal of Inorganic Chemistry. 1966, vol. 11. iss. 3, pp. 633 – 636 (in Russian).
3. Privalov Yu.V. Study of the sodium-oxygen-hydrogen system in relation to sodium coolant technology. Abstract of the Cand. Sci. Diss. Moscow. IVT AN USSR Publ., 1980, 22 p. (in Russian).
4. Kozlov F.A., Volchkov L.G., Kuznetsov E.K., Matyukhin V.V. Liquid metal coolants for nuclear power plants. Removal of impurities and their control. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 128 p. (in Russian).
5. Alekseev V.V., Borisov V.V., Perevoznikov S.V. Calculation of the equilibrium state of the sodium-oxygen-hydrogen system. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty. 2018, iss. 4, pp. 167 – 174. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2018/4/436-thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/1571-18.html (accessed Mar.15, 2024) (in Russian).
6. Kozlov F.A., ZagorulkoYu.I., Bogdanovich N.G. et al. Solubility of individual substances in sodium. IPPE Preprint-510. Obninsk. IPPE Publ., 1974, 98 p. (in Russian).
7. Alekseev V.V., Borisov V.V., Kamaev A.A., Ganichev N.S., Sutyagin I.A. Estimates of the composition of the heterogeneous sodium-oxygen-hydrogen system. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty. 2022, iss. 1, pp. 96–105. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2022/1/materials-thermomechanic/2119-9.html (accessed Mar.15, 2024) (in Russian).
8. Sergeev G.P. The state of experimental research under conditions of the sodium circuit of equilibrium and the kinetics of reactions with sodium of the products of its interaction with water. IPPE Preprint-2742. Obninsk. IPPE Publ., 1998, 22 p. (in Russian).
9. Peebls F., Garber H. Studies on the motion of gas bubbles in liquids. Chemical Engineering Progress. 1953, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 88 – 97.
10. Alekseev V.V., Borisov V.V., Kamaev A.A., Ganichev N.S., Vitsenko A.S. Determination of the amount of suspended phase formed during the interaction of water with sodium. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty. 2023, iss. 4, pp. 208 – 217. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2023/4/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/2419-17.html (accessed Mar.15, 2024) (in Russian).
