+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/11.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.11"
first_page="127"
last_page="137"
udc="621.039"
rubric="coolants"
rubric_name="Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
title="Features of Purification and Control of Sodium-Potassium Eutectic Alloy"
original_title="Особенности очистки и контроля натрий-калиевого эвтектического сплава"
authors=["UlyanovVV", "KoshelevMM", "KremlevaVS", "BraginDS", "PrikazchikovaAA"]
tags=["eutectic", "sodium-potassium", "coolant", "purification", "control"]

+++

Sodium-potassium is used mainly in low-power nuclear power plants, including space nuclear power plants.
When choosing a coolant for such nuclear power plants, it is not cost considerations that come to the fore, but the safety, pre-operational storage, transportation and launch of installations filled with coolant.
Justification for the use of a certain coolant in space nuclear power plants requires a thorough study of their physical and chemical properties, the type and form of impurities existing in it, the method of maintaining their quality, etc.
In connection with the emergence of new promising areas for the use of alkali metal melts, for example, as working fluids in pressure measurement sensors, in high-temperature heat pipes and other equipment that does not allow periodic cleaning, justification of methods for thorough pre-cleaning is required to ensure a long service life.
Molten alkali metals contain a variety of impurities, the amount of which depends on the specific operating conditions of the liquid metal circuit.
Such sources of impurities are known as impurities entering the source metal loaded into the circuit, impurities in inert gases, oxide films on the internal surfaces of structural materials and diffusion of gases through the walls during operation.
In circulation circuits, there is a continuous outflow of steel components into the cold zone, which leads to increased corrosion.
Oxygen, which has high solubility in alkali metals, has the most adverse effect on the corrosion of structural materials.
This article provides data on methods and means of controlling impurities in the circuit and methods for cleaning the alloy from them.
Cleaning can be done using various methods; a distinction is made between preliminary and contour cleaning.
The choice of purification method directly depends on the form of existence of impurities.
Monitoring the purity of liquid metal coolants is necessary to perform two tasks.
The first is the detection of emergency situations, such as depressurization of the circuit accompanied by a rapid increase in the content of impurities in the alloy and prevention of the consequences of decompaction (insoluble sediment in cold zones, blockage of pipelines, deterioration of thermal characteristics, etc.).
The second task is to control slowly developing processes, such as corrosion of structural materials.

### References

1. Subbotin V.I. Ivanovsky M.N., Arnoldov М.N. Physico-chemical foundations of liquid metal coolants. M.: Atomizdat, 1967 (in Russian).
2. Yarygin V.I., Kuptsov G.A., Ionkin V.I., Ovcharenko M.K., Ruzhnikov V.A., Mikheev A.S., Yarygin D.V. Thermionic power generating module for a power supply reactor in an aggressive zone with a remote thermionic system for converting thermal energy into electrical energy (options). RF Patent, No. 2187156, 2002 (in Russian).
3. Gibson M.A., Poston D.I., McClure P., Godfroy T., Sanzi J., Briggs M.H. The Kilopower Reactor Using Stirling TechnologY (KRUSTY) Nuclear Ground Tests Results and Lessons Learned. Proc. 2018 International Conference on Energy Conversion. Cincinnati, USA, 2018. AIAA 2018-4973. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2018-4973
4. Prikazchikova A.A., Ulyanov V.V., Kremleva V.S. Study of the features of distillation of alkali metals as a method of their preliminary purification. Abstracts of the XVIII International Scientific and Technical Conference «The Future of Nuclear Energy». Obninsk, IATE MEPhI. 2022, pp. 88 – 89 (in Russian).
5. Prikazchikova A.A., Ulyanov V.V., Koshelev M.M., Kremleva V.S. Study of distillation methods as a method of preliminary purification of alkaline coolants. Abstracts of the VI International (XIX Regional) scientific conference «Technogenic systems and environmental risk». Obninsk, 2023, pp. 53 – 55 (in Russian).
6. Ulyanov V.V., Koshelev M.M., Kremleva V.S., Prikazchikova A.A. Study of a method for purifying sodium-potassium alloy. Abstracts of the VI International (XIX Regional) scientific conference «Technogenic systems and environmental risk». Obninsk, 2023, pp. 60 – 62 (in Russian).
7. Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P. et al. Research on the justification of the sodium purification system built into the reactor tank. Proc. of the conference «Thermophysics-2013». Obninsk, IPPE. 2014, vol. 2, pp. 395 – 402 (in Russian).
9. Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Konovalov M.A., Delnov V.N. Nuclear power plant with a coolant purification system. Patent for invention RU 2614048 C1, 03/22/2017. Application No. 2016110062 dated 03/18/2016 (in Russian).
9. Alekseev V.V., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Trufanov A.A., Kryuchkov E.A., Varseev E.V., Konovalov M.A., Torbenkova I.Yu. Tests on a sodium test bench for a model of cold traps. Atomic Energy. 2017, vol. 122, no. 1, pp. 35 – 41. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0232-1
10. Kremleva V.S., Ulyanov V.V., Koshelev M.M. Study of oxide stress impurities in a eutectic alloy of potassium with sodium. Abstracts of the V International (XVIII Regional) scientific conference «Technogenic systems and environmental risk». Obninsk, 2022, pp. 37 – 39 (in Russian).
11. Kozlov F.A., Konovalov M.A., Sorokin A.P. Purification of liquid metal systems with sodium coolant from oxygen using getters. Thermal Engineering. 2016, no. 5, pp. 367 – 373. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/ S0040601516050049
12. Bragin D.S., Vereshchagina T.N., Loginov N.I. Calibration of an electromagnetic pump-flow meter. Problems of atomic science and technology. Series: Nuclear reactor constants. 2022, no. 4, pp. 194 – 200 (in Russian).
13. Kozlov F.A., Alekseev V.V., Sorokin A.P. Development of sodium technologies as a coolant for fast reactors. Atomic Energy. 2014, vol. 116, no. 4, pp. 278 – 284. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-014-9854-8
14. Kalyakin S.G., Sorokin A.P., Kozlov F.A., Alekseev V.V., Scherbakov S.I. Studies validating a sodium purification system integrated in the reactor vessel. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 81 – 89; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.09 (in Russian).
15. Arnoldov M.N., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P. Physical chemistry and technology of alkaline liquid metal coolants. Problems of atomic science and technology. Series: Nuclear reactor constants. 2014, no. 2, pp. 18 – 32 (in Russian).
