+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-06-05T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2024-02"
issue_name="2024 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="15"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/02/15.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.2.15"
first_page="185"
last_page="201"
udc="621.039.59"
rubric="modeling"
rubric_name="Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
title="Computational Analysis of the Closed Fuel Cycle of a VVER-1200 Reactor Based on Plutonium From Spent Nuclear Fuel"
original_title="Расчетные исследования замкнутого топливного цикла реактора типа ВВЭР-1200 на плутонии из отработавшего ядерного топлива"
authors=["IsanovKA", "KolesovVV", "KorobeynikovVV", "UsanovVI", "KhnykinaES"]
tags=["fuel cycles", "closed nuclear fuel cycle", "MOX-fuel", "spent fuel", "stationary fuel cycle"]

+++

The article provides a computational analysis of the closure of the nuclear fuel cycle for plutonium in the variant of fully loading the core of a VVER-1200 reactor with MOX fuel, ensuring multiple recycling of plutonium. The main factors shaping the need to involve plutonium in the fuel cycle and close the fuel cycle are identified and analyzed.
To form the fuel composition, several sources of plutonium were considered, namely: low-background plutonium and plutonium from spent fuel from VVER, BN and RBMK reactors.
Reserves of energy-grade plutonium of various origins, including high-quality plutonium, have been found in open published sources.
During the work, the quality of each type of plutonium and their value in the thermal spectrum of the reactor were taken into account.
The starting load for each type of loaded plutonium, the share of make- up plutonium after the system is brought to a stationary level, as well as the disadvantages and advantages of each of the types of plutonium under consideration are determined.
Strategies for single, double and multiple involvement of plutonium are considered.
Based on the data obtained, estimates were made of the rate of burning plutonium from spent fuel stocks, as well as an assessment of the savings of natural uranium.
Based on an assessment of the efficiency of plutonium from spent nuclear fuel from different sources, the most suitable options for the initial loading and replenishment of VVER-1200 with MOX fuel were selected.
The calculated plutonium content in MOX fuel of a VVER-1200 reactor with multiple recycling of plutonium from spent fuel from VVER and BN, selected close to the level used in practice in light water reactors with one third of the load with such fuel, indicates the fundamental possibility of closing the nuclear fuel cycle thermal plutonium reactor.

Additionally, the work assessed the increase in the accumulation of minor actinides - americium and curium when implementing the option of afterburning the accumulated plutonium in a closed cycle of a thermal reactor.
The rates of their accumulation, as well as the quality of the produced americium and curium, are presented.

### References

1. Pershukov V.A., Tikhomirov G.V. Closed nuclear fuel cycle. Energeticheskiy vestnik. 2023, vol. 28, pp. 88 – 95. Available at: https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/zamknutyy-yadernyy-toplivnyy-tsikl?ysclid=luv8lw ik7e557306917 (accessed: Nov. 12, 2023) (in Russian).
2. Alekseev P.N., Alekseev C.V., Andrianova E.A. Two-component nuclear power system with thermal and fast reactors in the closed nuclear fuel cycle. (Ed. by the acad. of RAS Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N.) Moscow. Tekhnosphera Publ., 2016, 160 p. Available at: https://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/dvuhkomponentnaya-yadernaya-systema_2016/p0/ (accessed: Nov. 13, 2023) (in Russian).
3. Strategy for the development of nuclear energy in Russia in the first half of 21st century. Illustration of the main points. Moscow. FGUP «TSNIIATOMINFORM, 2001. 65 p. Available at: https://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/ strategiya-atomnoy-energetiki-21-veka_2001/p0a/ (accessed: Nov. 13, 2023) (in Russian).
4. Dynkin A.A., Gorbatov A.G., Baranovsky V.A. SISPI yearbook 2018. Weapons disarmament and military security. Moscow, IMEMO RAN, 2019, 752 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.20542/978-5-9535-0557-4 (in Russian).
5. Andrianov A.A., Korobeinikov V.V., Poplavskaya E.V., Rachkova E. N., Fedorova E.V. Optimization studies of the Russian nuclear power structure with thermal and fast neutron reactors using the MESSAGE. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2010, no. 2, pp. 156–164. Available at: https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/journals/2010/02.pdf (accessed: Nov. 15, 2023) (in Russian).
6. Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A., Zilberman B.Ya., Kudryavtsev E G. Use of regenerated uranium and plutonium in thermal reactors. Atomic Energy. 2005, vol. 99, no. 2, pp. 572–576. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1007/s10512-005-0248-9 (in Russian).
7. Tuzov A.A., Troyanov V.M., Gulevich A.V., Gurskaya O.S., Dekusar V.M., Moseev A.L. Simonenko V.A. On the issue of the initial stage of closing the nuclear fuel cycle of two-component nuclear power in Russia. Atomic Energy. 2022, v. 133, no. 2, pp. 72 – 78. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-023-00975-8 (in Russian).
8. Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N. Two-Component Nuclear Power System with a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle Based on BN and VVER Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2016, vol. 120, no. 4, pp. 233 – 239. DOI: https://doi. org/10.1007/s10512-016-0123-x (in Russian).
9. At Atomexpo about the raw material supply of the nuclear fuel cycle. ATOMINFO.RU, Dec.5, 2022. Available at: http://www.atominfo.ru/newsz05/a0788.htm (accessed: Nov. 21, 2023) (in Russian).
10. Belov S.B., Volodin D.A., Grol A.V., Kotov Ya.A., Kurakin K.Yu., Marova E.V., Nevinitsa V.A., Pavlovichev A.M., Pidoprigora E.V., Smirnov A.Yu., Pharakshin M.R., Fomichenko P.A., Sherenko A.I., Gulevich A.V., Decusar V.M., Eliseev V.A., Klinov D.A. The influence of the fast reactor on the parameters of the material balances of the light-water thermal reactor in the context of the product line «balanced nuclear fuel cycle». Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Series: Nuclear and Reactor Constants. 2022, no. 3, pp.83–92.Availableat: https://vant.ippe.ru/images/pdf/2022/issue2022-3-83-92.pdf(accessed:Nov.21, 2023) (in Russian).
11. Alimov Yu.V., Galeeva N.M., Davydov V.K., Zhirnov A.P., Kuznetsov P.B. Rozhdestvensky I.M., Rozhdestvensky M.I. Conversion of the RBMK-1000 reactors to regenerated fuel with an increased content of even uranium isotopes. Problems of Atomic Science and Technology. Series: Nuclear and Reactor Constants. 2020, no. 3, pp. 63 – 67. DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2020-3-63-67 (in Russian).
12. The BN-800 reactor completely switched to MOX fuel. Available at: https://strana-rosatom.ru/2022/09/09/ reaktor-bn-800-polnostju-pereshel-na-moks/ (accessed Nov. 22, 2023) (in Russian).
13. Polshikova O.V. Fuel of the future: MOX and REMIX fuel. Proc. of «Mezhdunarodnaya nauchno- tekhnicheskaya konferentsiya molodykh uchenykh BGTU im. V.G. Shukhova, posv. 300-letiyu RAS». 2022, pp. 266 – 269. Available at: https://elibrary.ru/item.asp?id=49247309 (accessed Nov. 23, 2023) (in Russian).
14. Kazazyan V.T., Malykhin A.P., Vaitsetskaya E.F., Dneprovskaya N.M., Rubin I.E., Tetereva N.A. Preliminary analysis of the possibility of using REMIX fuel in VVER-1200 reactors of the Belarusian NPP. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of Belarus. Physical-technical series. 2022, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 57–64. DOI: https://doi.org/10.29235/1561-8358-2022-67-1-57-64 (in Russian).
15. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Semchenkov Y.M., Kudryavtsev E.G., Fedorov Y.S., Bibichev B.A., Zil’berman B.Y. Neutron-physical characteristics of a VVER-1000 core with 100% fuel load consisting of a mixture of recovered uranium and plutonium and enriched uranium. Atomic Energy. 2008, vol. 104, iss. 4, pp. 257 – 261. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-008-9025-x
16. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Semchenkov Y.M., Kudryavtsev E.G., Fedorov Y.S., Bibichev B.A. Neutron-physical characteristics of a VVÉR core with 100% load of reprocessed uranium and plutonium fuel. Atomic Energy. 2006, vol. 101, iss. 6, pp. 863 – 868. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-006-0182-5
17. Alekseev P.N., Bobrov E.A., Chibinyaev A.V., Teplov P.S., Dudnikov A.A. Multiple recycle of the REMIX fuel at work the VVER-1000 operation in the closed fuel cycle. Problems of Atomic Science and Engineering. Series: Physics of Nuclear Reactors. 2014, no. 4, pp. 115-126. Available at: https://elibrary.ru/ thggmj?ysclid=lt2r0gpueu442505335 (accessed Nov. 23, 2023) (in Russian).
18. Dekusar V.M., Kagramanyan V.S., Kalashnikov A.G., Kapranova E.N., Korobitsyn V.E., Puzakov A.Y. The comparison analyses of VVER REMIX-fuel characteristics when multiple recycling were made. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 109 – 117. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2013.4.14 (in Russian).
19. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.Kh., Lopatkin A.V., Muratov V.G., Orlov V.V. Transmutation fuel cycle in Russia’s large-scale nuclear power industry. Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 1999, 273 p. (in Russian).
20. Korobeynikov V.V., Kolesov V.V., Karazhelevskaya Yu.E., Terekhova A.M. Research on the possibility of burning and transmutation of Am-241 in a reactor with americium fuel. Scope statement: Preprint IPPE-3284. Obninsk, IPPE JSC Publ., 2018, 14 p. Available at: https://www.ippe.ru/images/publications/ preprints/2018/3284_korob.pdf (accessed Nov. 23, 2023) (in Russian).
