+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:24:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="14"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Low-Power Nuclear Power Plants in the Context of Electric Power Systems Transformation"
original_title="Малая атомная энергетика в контексте трансформации электроэнергетических систем"
authors=["SarkisovAA", "AntipovSV", "SmolentsevDO", "BilashenkoVP", "KobrinskyMN", "SotnikovVA", "ShvedovPA"]
tags=["Arctic region", "isolation power system", "distributed generation", "low-power nuclear power plant", "development forecast", "radiation safety", "sea areas", "mathematical modeling"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.01"

+++

Increasing economic importance of the Arctic, further intensification of northern sea routes, and exceptional sensitivity of the arctic natural environment to anthropogenic impacts are fundamental factors for a comprehensive study of environmental aspects in the application of innovative technologies for the development of infrastructure in the Arctic.

Despite the growing interest in low-power nuclear power plants as a distributed generation facility, their possible application in technologically isolated power systems does not lose relevance. The development of both the Arctic and Far Eastern regions of the Russian Federation presents great opportunities and demand for the use of nuclear power sources. Also, development programs for the Russian arctic zone imply a significant increase in the role and number of nuclear power facilities, in other words of potential radiation-hazardous facilities.

Large-scale use of nuclear-powered installations in the Arctic necessitates advanced development of a scientifically grounded and modern forecasting system as well as assessments of threats and risks in case of possible radiation emergencies at nuclear- and radiation-hazardous facilities. Also, the development of proposals for necessary measures to minimize negative consequences of such emergencies is required. This is especially true for the case of compact placement of industrial, infrastructure and residential facilities in the Arctic in the immediate vicinity of nuclear facilities.

The paper demonstrates that the demand for low-power nuclear power plants and their competitiveness will grow steadily in the conditions of electric-power industry decentralization, further spread of distributed generation and the development of technologically isolated power systems. Approaches to the generation of a low nuclear-power system based on the philosophy of industrialization of production and centralized management are presented. Special features of the environmental impact assessment of low-power nuclear power plants for the development of a methodology to study the radio-ecological hazard related problems are provided.

### References

1. Low$Power Nuclear Power Plants – a New Line in the Development of Power Systems.Vol.
2. Ed. by akad. RAN A.A. Sarkisov. Moscow. Akadem-Print Publ., 2015, 387 p. (in Russian).
2. Sarkisov A.A. Introductory Paper of the Chairman of the Conference Scientific Committee. Low$Power Nuclear Power Plants – a New Line in the Development of Power Systems. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2011, v. 1, pp. 7-12 (in Russian).
3. Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program. Available at: https://www.energy.gov/ne/nuclear-reactor-technologies/advanced-reactor-demonstration-program (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
4. Project «Pele». Available at: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Pele (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
5. Strategy for Digital Transformation of the Electric Power Industry in the Russian Federation. Available at: https://www.digital-energy.ru/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/strategiya-tsifrovoy-transformatsii-elektroenergetiki.pdf (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
6. Energy Strategy of the Russian Federation for the Period up to 2035 (approved by the Federal Government on June 9, 2020 No 1523-r). Available at: https://minenergo.gov.ru/node/1026 (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
7. An Action Plan («Roadmap») to Improve Legislation and Eliminate Administrative Barriers for the Implementation of the «ENERGYNET» National Technological Initiative (approved by the Federal Government on June 9, 2020 No 1526-r). Available at: http://publication.pravo.gov.ru/Document/View/0001202006110001 (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
8. GOST R 58092.1-2018 Electric energy storage (ESS) systems. Terms and definitions. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200159405 (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
9. Preliminary National Standard of the Russian Federation. Information Technology. Smart Energy. Terms and Definitions. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/437253092(accessed Jun. 06, 2020) (in Russian).
10. Fundamentals of the State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Arctic for the Period up to 2035 (approved by Decree No 164 of the President of the Russian Federation Dated March 05, 2020). Available at: http://publication.pravo.gov.ru/Document/View/0001202003050019 (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
11. Infrastructure Development Plan for the Northern Sea Route until 2035 (approved by the Federal Government on Dec. 21, 2019 No 3120-r). Available at: http://government.ru/docs/38714 (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
12. Sarkisov A.A., Antipov S.V., Smolentsev D.O., Bilashenko V.P., Kobrinsky M.N., Sotnikov V.A., Shvedov P.A. Safe Development of Nuclear Power Technologies in the Arctic: Prospects and Approaches. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 3, pp. 5-17; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.01 (in Russian).
13. Small Modular Nuclear Power Plants. Available at: https://www.atomic-energy.ru/SMR (accessed Aug 18, 2020) (in Russian).
14. Sarkisov A.A., Smolentsev D.O., Antipov S.V., Bilashenko V.P., Shvedov P.A. Economic Efficiency and Possibilities of Using Megawatt-class Nuclear Power Sources in the Arctic. Arktika: Ecologiya i Ekonomika. 2018, no. 1 (29), pp. 4-14 (in Russian).
15. Small Modular Reactors: Nuclear Energy Market Potential for Near-Term Deployment. [S. 1.]: OECD, 2016. (NEA No. 7213).
16. Saneev B.G., Ivanova I.Yu., Korneev A.G. Assessment of Electrical Loads of Potential Projects for the Development of Mineral Resources in the Eastern Regions of the Arctic Zone of the Russian Federation. Arktika: Ecologiya i Ekonomika. 2020, no. 1 (37), pp. 4-14 (in Russian).
17. Considerations for Environmental Impact Assessment for Small Modular Reactors. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency, 2020. IAEA-TECDOC-1915.
18. Naumov V.A., Gusak S.A., Naumov A.V. Small Nuclear Power Plants for Power Supply to the Arctic Regions: Spent Nuclear Fuel Radioactivity Assessment. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 1, pp. 75-86; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.08 (in Russian).