+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/03.pdf"
first_page="25"
last_page="36"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental Investigation of the Coolant Flow in the VVER Reactor Core with TVSA Fuel Assemblies"
original_title="Экспериментальное исследование течения потока теплоносителя в активной зоне реактора ВВЭР с ТВСА"
authors=["DmitrievSM", "GerasimovAV", "DobrovAA", "DoronkovDV", "ProninAN", "RyazanovAV", "SolntsevDN", "KhrobostovAE", "NoskovAS", "SamoylovOB", "ShvetsovYuK", "ShipovDL"]
tags=["reactor core", "fuel assembly", "spacer grids", "mixing grids", "interassembly interaction", "coolant fluid dynamics"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.03"

+++

The paper presents the results of an experimental study to investigate the interaction of coolant in adjoining fuel assemblies in the VVER reactor core composed of TVSA-T and upgraded TVSA FAs. The processes of the in-core coolant flow were simulated in a test wind tunnel. The experiments were conducted using models representing different portions of the VVER reactor core fuel bundle and consisted in measuring the radial and axial air flow velocities in characteristic zones within the FAs and in the space between them. The results of the experiments can be translated to the full-scale conditions of the coolant flow with the use of the fluid dynamics simulation theory. The measurements were performed using a five-channel pneumometric probe. The coolant flow pattern in different portions of the fuel bundle is represented by distribution diagrams and maps for the radial and axial velocity vector components in the characteristic zones of the models. An analysis for the spatial distribution of the radial and axial velocity vector components has made it possible to obtain a detailed pattern of the coolant flow about the FA spacer, mixing and combined spacer grids of different designs. The accumulated database for the coolant flow in FAs of different designs forms the basis for the engineering justification of the VVER reactor core reliability and serviceability. The investigation results for the interaction of coolant in adjoining TVSA FAs of different designs have been adopted for the practical use at JSC Afrikantov OKB to estimate the heat engineering reliability of the VVER reactor cores and have been included in the database for verification of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) codes and detailed by-channel calculation codes.

### References

1. Dmitriev S.M., Zverev D.L., Byh O.A., Panov Yu.K., Sorokin N.M., Farafonov V.A. Basic equipment of nuclear power plants with thermal neutron reactors. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 2013, 415 p. (in Russian).
2. Borodin S.S., Dmitriev S.M., Legchanov M.A., Hrobostov A.E., Samojlov O.B., Sorokin N.M. Peculiarities of coolant hydrodynamics in alternative fuel assemblies of VVER-1000 reactors using mixing grids. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2006, no. 4, pp. 70-76 (in Russian).
3. Samojlov O.B., Kupriyanov A.V., Fal’kov A.A., Shipov D.L., Molodcov A.A., Luk’yanov V.E. Experimental studies of thermotechnical characteristics of TVSA with mixing lattices. Atomnaya Energiya. 2014, v. 116, iss. 1, pp. 11-14 (in Russian).
4. Dmitriev S.M., Luk’yanov V.E., Samojlov O.B. Justification of the correlation for calculating the critical heat flux in fuel assemblies of an alternative design with stirring intensifier grids for VVER-1000. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 1, pp. 99-108 (in Russian).
5. Samojlov O.B., Shipov D.L., Fal’kov A.A., Bogryakov V.G., Sorokin N.M., Dmitriev S.M. Thermal-hydraulic and hydrodynamic studies of the characteristics of TVSs of an alternative design of VVER-1000. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2004, iss. 2, pp. 47-55 (in Russian).
6. Samojlov O.B., Kuul’ V.S., Preobrazhenskij D.G. Results of the creation and development of fuel assemblies of an alternative design for the VVER-1000 reactor. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2005, iss. 1, p. 126 (in Russian).
7. Samojlov O.B., Fal’kov A.A., Morozkin O.N., Luk’yanov V.E. Refinement of the methodology for accounting for deviations of local parameters when justifying the thermotechnical reliability of the core from TVSA VVER-1000. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2010, iss. 4, pp. 111-119 (in Russian).
8. Dmitriev S.M., Borodin S.S., Legchanov M.A., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Experimental studies of hydrodynamic and mass transfer characteristics of the coolant flow in VVER fuel assemblies. Atomnaya Energiya. 2012, v. 113, iss. 5, pp. 252-257 (in Russian).
9. Dmitriev S.M., Varencov A.V., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Samojlov O.B., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Computational and experimental studies of local hydrodynamics and mass exchange of the coolant flow in TVS-Kvadrat PWR reactors with mixing grids. Teploenergetika. 2014, no. 8, pp. 20-27 (in Russian).
10. Dmitriev S.M., Varencov A.V., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Legchanov M.A., Hrobostov A.E. Investigation of the coolant mass transfer behind the mixing grids of the fuel assemblies of the VBER 300 reactors in order to substantiate their efficiency. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2013, iss. 5, pp. 197-205 (in Russian).
11. Dmitriev S.M., Varencov A.V., Doronkov D.V., Pronin A.N., Solncev D.N., Hrobostov A.E., Suharev Yu.P. Experimental studies of the hydrodynamics of the coolant flow behind the TVSA-12PLUS spacer and mixing grids of the VVER-1000 reactor. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2017, iss. 1, pp. 126-134 (in Russian).
12. Barinov A.A., Dmitriev S.M., Hrobostov A.E., Samojlov O.B. On the question of the methodology of substantiating the thermal engineering reliability of the active zones of WPRs. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 120, iss. 5, pp. 270-275 (in Russian).
13. Gerasimov A.V., Dmitriev S.M., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Pronin A.N., Ryazanov A.V., Solncev D.N., Hrobostov A.E. Computational and experimental studies of the processes of the coolant flow in the region of the guide channel behind the mixing grids of fuel assemblies. Inzhenerno'Fizicheskiy Zhurnal. 2020, v. 93, iss. 1, pp. 151-160 (in Russian).
14. Samojlov O.B., Noskov A.S., Shipov D.L., Dmitriev S.M., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Legcha-nov M.A., Pronin A.N., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Hydrodynamic features of the coolant flow behind the mixing spacer grid TVS-Kvadrat PWR reactor. Teploenergetika. 2019, iss. 4, pp. 32-38 (in Russian).
15. Dmitriev S.M., Doronkov D.V., Pronin A.N., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Computational and experimental studies of the hydrodynamics and mass transfer of the coolant behind the spacer grid of the fuel assembly of the reactor of a floating power unit. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 60-70 (in Russian).
16. Varencov A.V., Doronkov D.V., Kupricheva E.S., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D. Experimental studies of local mass transfer and the efficiency of mixing the coolant with spacer grids in fuel assemblies of the KLT-40S reactor. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2012, iss. 1, pp. 107-113 (in Russian).
17. Varencov A.V., Doronkov D.V., Ilyutina E.M., Karatushina I.V., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Peculiarities of the coolant flow in TVS-Kvadrat of the PWR reactor when setting up stirring spacers with different types of deflectors. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2015, iss. 3, pp. 134-143 (in Russian).
18. Dmitriev S.M., Doronkov D.V., Legchanov M.A., Pronin A.N., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Investigation of hydrodynamic characteristics and features of the coolant flow behind the spacer grid of the fuel assembly of the reactor of a floating power unit. Teplofizika i Aeromekhanika. 2016, v. 23, iss. 3, pp 385-394 (in Russian).
19. Dmitriev S.M., Dobrov A.A., Doronkov D.V., Pronin A.N., Solncev D.N., Sorokin V.D., Hrobostov A.E. Study of hydrodynamic processes of coolant flow in TVS-Kvadrat PWR reactor with various mixing spacers. Teplofizika i Aeromekhanika. 2018, v. 25, iss. 5, pp. 725-734 (in Russian).
20. Dmitriev S.M., Dobrov A.A., Legchanov M.A., Hrobostov A.E. Application of a multichannel pneumometric probe to study the velocity profile of a coolant in models of fuel cassettes of nuclear reactors. Pribory i Metody Izmereniy. 2015, v. 6, iss. 2 , pp. 188-195 (in Russian).