+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/04.pdf"
first_page="37"
last_page="49"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Using the Unit Simulation Model to Improve Design Solutions and Optimize Process Management"
original_title="Использование программной модели блока для совершенствования проектных решений и оптимизации управления технологическим процессом"
authors=["StatsuraDB", "TuchkovMYu", "PovarovPV", "TikhonovAI", "PadunSP", "VorobyovАP", "MayorovaMM"]
tags=["OISS", "technological process", "interactive procedure", "power unit model", "decision making", "monitoring", "design solutions", "optimization", "I&C", "algorithms"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.04"

+++

Advanced design power units are distinguished by a high degree of digital transformation. Therefore, the Operator Information Support System (OISS) is of particular interest, since it can reduce the workload on operating personnel as well as predict possible deviations long before they evolve into severe accidents.

The article analyzes the current standard process documentation that requires solutions to support the operator and determines the list of system functions that should be provided to improve the safety level of nuclear power plants.

A brief overview of the world experience in implementing such solutions is also provided. As an example of the further development of operator support system, the authors consider the operator information support system (OISS), which is being developed at the NvNPP pilot unit with the VVER-1200 reactor. The OISS functions will make it possible to fulfill the requirements of standard process documentation that are currently not implemented in the power unit design.

The key features of the OISS under development are step-by-step interactive procedures and the unit simulation model. The article provides a brief description of the power unit simulated model and considers several examples of its practical application as part of the OISS to improve design solutions and optimize automatic process control. Further implementation of the OISS is proposed at power units under construction in order to reduce the information overload of operators and create conditions for a step-by-step increase in the automation level of the power unit control.

### References

1. NP-082-07. Nuclear safety regulations for NPP reactor. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2007, 67 p. (in Russian).
2. NP-001-15. General safety regulations for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, pp. 28, 33 (in Russian).
3. RB-152-18. Safety guide in the area of atomic energy use. Comments to federal norms and rules «General provisions for nuclear power plants safety assurance» (NP 001 15). Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2018, 197 p. (in Russian).
4. GOST R IEC 60964-2012. Nuclear power plants. Control rooms. Designing. Мoscow. Standartinform Publ., 2014, pp. 4, 21 (in Russian).
5. IEA 60960-1988. Principles for designing nuclear power plant’s safety parameters display systems. Мoscow. Standartinform Publ., 2000 (in Russian).
6. GOST R IEC 60964-2012. Control Rooms. Design. Nuclear Power Plants. Мoscow. Standartinform Publ., 2014, p. 21 (in Russian).
7. GOST R IEC 62241-2012. Nuclear Power Plants. Main Control Room. Functions and alarms display. Мoscow. Standartinform Publ., 2014, p. 12 (in Russian).
8. Butner V.E. Use by FRG NPP operators of enhanced computer based auxiliary sys-tems. Byulleten’ MAGATE, autumn 1985, pp. 15-20 (in Russian).
9. Anokhin F.N., Kalinushkin А.Е., Gorbaev V.А., Sivokon V.P. Status and challenges of NPP operators support systems. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 5-16; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.2.01 (in Russian).
10. Bashlykov A.A., Eremeev A.P. Expert Support Systems for Decision Making in Nuclear Power Engineering. Moscow. MEI Publ., 1994, 216 p. (in Russian).
11. Palagin А.А., Efimov А.V. Simulation Experiment using Mathematical Models of Turbine Sets. Kiev. Naukova Dumka Publ., 1986, 132 p. (in Russian).
12. Lavrentichev D.V., Tverskoy Yu.S. Mathematical model of VVER-1000 NPP primary circuit and assessment of dynamic accuracy during variable modes. Vestnik IGEU. 2015, iss. 6, pp. 1-12 (in Russian).
13. Zhuravkin А.P., Lebedev А.О. Application of power units mathematical models for testing of Kudankulam NPP control system. Teploenergetika. 2011, no. 5, pp. 37-40 (in Russian).
14. Zhuravkin А.P., Kroshilin A.E., Fuks R.L. Development and peculiarities of NPP simulator models verification. Teploenergetika. 2010, no. 5, pp. 34-38 (in Russian).
15. Kothe Doug. CASL and the virtual reactor. Nuclear News. 2011, no. 3, pp. 88-90.
16. Larzelere A.R. Nuclear energy advanced modeling and simulation (NEAMS). Available at: http://science.energy.gov//media/ascr/ascac/pdf/meetings/nov09/ Larzelere.pdf (accessed Jul 05, 2020).
17. Arkadov G.V., Zhuravin А.P., Kroshilin А.Е., Parshikov I.А., Soloviev S.L., Shishov А.V. Virtual digital NPP – modern tool for VVER type NPP life cycles support. Teploenergetika. 2014, no. 10, pp. 3-11 (in Russian).