+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/05.pdf"
first_page="50"
last_page="62"
udc="621.039.54"
title="Rapid Preliminary Modeling of Floating NPP Cores"
original_title="Эскизное экспресс*моделирование активных зон плавучих объектов с ЯЭУ"
authors=["KorolevVI"]
tags=["core", "energy resource", "combined dimensionless parameter", "nuclear fuel", "burn-up depth", "fission products", "fuel element", "fuel matrix", "uranium dioxide", "swelling compensator", "cladding integrity", "effective life"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.05"

+++

At the present time, JSC Baltiskiy zavod has built and transported to the deployment site at Pevek the «Akademik Lomonosov», a floating nuclear power unit (FNPU), project 20870. There are also three multi-purpose nuclear icebreakers of project 22220 («Arktika», «Sibir», «Ural») under construction at Baltiskiy being at different readiness stages. A decision has been made to build a nuclear icebreaker, «Lider», of even a higher power. Integral reactors developed by JSC OKBM Afrikantov are installed in the nuclear icebreakers using new assembly-type cores which have not been used earlier in floating facilities. A great deal of preliminary calculation is required to give these cores as advantageous characteristics as possible. The paper proposes a procedure for rapid modeling of floating cores with varied operating and design characteristics. This procedure can be used as part of preliminary modeling. The procedure is based on using a combined dimensionless parameter proposed by the author in [2]. A chart is presented to model the key performance of cores for floating NPPs. Eight assembly-type core options, which can be installed in transport reactors of a modular or integral design, are analyzed.

### References

1. Polunichev V.I., Golubeva D.A. Some Directions for Increase of Corrosion Resistance of Zirconium Alloys Core Elements of Ship and Floating Nuclear Power Plants. Proc. of the Intersectoral Workshop «50 Years of the Russian Nuclear Icebreaker Fleet. Experience of creation, operation and development prospects». N. Novgorod. OKBM Afrikantov Publ., 2009. 196 p. (in Russian).
2. Korolev V.I. Generalizing Operational and Design Parameter for Water-Water Reactors. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2009, no.3, pp. 106-111 (in Russian).
3. Lastovtsev A.Yu., Korolev V.I. Ensuring Reliability of Floating Object Nuclear Reactors during Design and Operation. St. Petersburg. Makarov GUMRF Publ., 2017. 204 p. (in Russian).
4. Lastovtsev A.Yu., Korolev V.I. Evaluation of Operational and Structural Characteristics in Design of Core Zones of Low Power Water-Water Reactors for Floating Objects with NPP. Proc. of the Makarov State Maritime Academy «Operation of Sea Transport». 2010, no. 1 (59), pp. 56-62 (in Russian).
5. Korolev V.I., Lastovtsev A.Yu. Prediction of the Design Characteristics of the Cores of Low-Power Nuclear Reactors for Surface Floating Objects. Proc. of the Makarov State Maritime Academy «Operation of Sea Transport». 2008, no. 2, pp. 47-53 (in Russian).
6. Loschakov I.I., Korolev V.I. Investigation of the Surface Boiling Mode in the Transport Reactor Core Zones. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2004, no. 3, pp. 100-107 (in Russian).
7. Korolev V.I. Overcoming the wall boiling regime on the surface of fuel elements in low-power pressurized water reactors by choosing the design and thermophysical characteristics of the core. Proc. of the Makarov State Maritime Academy «Operation of Sea Transport». 2008. no. 2, pp. 53-59 (in Russian).
8. Lastovtsev A.Yu., Korolev V.I. Design of reactor cores of small power reactors with condition of prevention of surface boiling on fuel rod cladding. Proc. of the Makarov State Maritime Academy «Operation of Sea Transport». 2010, no. 4, pp. 67-71 (in Russian).
9. Kuznetsov V.A. Marine Nuclear Reactors. Leningrad. Sudostroenie Publ., 1988. 264 p. (in Russian).
10. Knyazevsky K.Yu., Fadeev Yu.P., Pakhomov A.N., Polunichev V.I., Veshnyakov K.B., Kabin S.V. Design Solutions of the RITM-200 Reactor Plant Designed to Ensure Ecologically Safe and Cost-Effective Operation of the Universal Nuclear Icebreaker on the Arctic Routes. Arktika: Ekologiya i Ekonomika. 2014, no. 3 (15), pp. 87-93 (in Russian).