+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/06.pdf"
first_page="63"
last_page="73"
udc="621.039.517"
title="Study of the Critical Heat Flux in Small Diameter Channels"
original_title="Исследование кризиса теплоотдачи в каналах малого диаметра"
authors=["BelozerovVI", "GorbaсhAS"]
tags=["experimental facility", "working area", "heat supply and removal", "critical heat flux", "boiling point", "results of experimental studies"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.06"

+++

The article describes experimental studies of hydrodynamics and heat transfer in a forced water flow in small-diameter channels at low pressures. The relevance of the studies is associated with a steady trend of interest in small heat exchangers. Small-diameter channels are actively used in components of compact heat exchangers for modern engineering and technical developments.

The main difficulty in studying heat transfer processes in small-diameter channels is the creation of methods for calculating the coefficients of hydraulic resistance and heat transfer in a two-phase flow. The influence of the channel size on the heat transfer and hydrodynamics of a two-phase flow is one of the defining parameters, since the existing internal scales (vapor bubble size, liquid droplet diameter, film thickness) can become comparable to the channel diameter, which can lead to different flow regimes. Obviously, in single-phase flows, there is no reason to expect a change in the laws of momentum and energy transfer with a decrease in the channel size, as long as the continuum approximation remains valid.

The authors analyzed the experiments of domestic scientists on the study of the distribution of thermal-hydraulic parameters in small cross-section tubes in the entire range of variation of flow parameters in the channel up to critical heat flux conditions, when the wall temperature rises sharply with a slowly increasing heat load. In addition, a comparison was made of the experimental data obtained by domestic and foreign authors on the critical heat flux.

### References

1. Vasiliev A.N. Heat Transfer Crisis Associated with Sharp Boiling of Liquid in Small Diameter Channels. Abstract of Cand. Tech. Sci. Diss. Kiev. Institute of Technical Thermophysics of the Academy of Sciences of the Ukrainian SSR Publ., 1971. 21 p. (in Russian).
2. Belyaev A.V. Experimental Study of Hydrodynamics and Heat Transfer in Small-Diameter Channels at High Reduced Pressures. Abstract of Cand. Tech. Sci. Diss. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2018. 20 p. (in Russian).
3. Kirillov P.L. Heat transfer crisis in channels. Atomnaya Energiya. 1996, v. 80, iss. 5, pp. 370-379 (in Russian).
4. Vasiliev A.N., Kirillov P.L. Heat Transfer Crisis During Liquid Boiling. Atomnaya Energiya. 1972, v. 32, iss. 2, pp. 154-155 (in Russian).
5. Skripov V.P. Metastable and Supercritical Conditions in the «Liquid(Steam» System. Abstract of Dr. Phys. and Math. Sci. Diss. Sverdlovsk. UPI n.a. S.M. Kirov Publ., 1967. 32 p. (in Russian).
6. Skripov V.P. Metastable Liquid. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1972. 312 p. (in Russian).
7. Doroshchuk V.E., Lantsman F.P. Influence of the Pipe Diameter on the Critical Heat Flux. Teploenergetika. 1963, no. 8, pp. 73-76 (in Russian).
8. Levitan L.L., Lantsman F.P., Dedneva E.I. Influence of the Pipe Diameter on the Heat Transfer Crisis of the Second Kind. Teploenergetika. 1981, no. 7, pp. 40-44 (in Russian).
9. Edelstein S., Perez A.J., Chen J.C. Analytic Representation of Convective Boiling Functions. AICHE J. 1984, v. 30, pp. 840-841.
10. Steiner D., Taborek J. Flow boiling heat transfer in vertical tubes correlated by an asymptotic model. Heat Transfer Engineering. 1992, v. 13(2), pp. 43-68.
11. Ornadsky A.P., Kichigin A.M. Study of the Dependence of the Critical Heat Load on the Weight Velocity, Subcooling and Pressure. Teploenergetika. 1961, no. 2, pp. 75-79 (in Russian).
12. Ornadsky A.P. Critical Heat Loads and Heat Transfer during Forced Movement of Water in Pipes in the Region of Ultra-High Pressures (175 – 220 atm.). Teploenergetika. 1963, no. 3, pp. 66-69 (in Russian).
13. Kew P.A., Cornwell K. Correlations for Prediction of Boiling Heat Transfer in Small-Diameter Channels. Applied Thermal Engineering. 1997, v. 17A, pp. 705-715.
14. Hamdar M., Zoughaib A., Clodic D. Flow Boiling Heat Transfer and Pressure Drop of Pure HFC-152a in a Horizontal Mini-Channel. Int. J. Refrigeration. 2010, v. 33, pp. 566-577.
15. Yagov V.V. Heat Transfer at Developed Nucleate Boiling. Teploenergetika. 1988, no. 2, pp. 4-9 (in Russian).
16. Sung-Min Kim, Issam Mudawar. Review of Databases and Predictive Methods for Pressure Drop in Adiabatic, Condensing and Boiling Mini/Micro-Channel Flows. Int. J. of Heat and Mass Transfer. 2014, v. 77, pp. 74-97.
17. Serizawa A., Xu J., Feng Z. Two-Phase Flow and Heat Transfer in Micro-Channels. Proc. of the IV-th Japanese-European Two-Phase Flow Group Meeting. Kyoto University, 2006, pp. 247-252.
18. Boltenko E.A., Pometko R.S., Katan I.B. et al. Effect of Pipe Diameter on Critical Heat Flux. Proc. of the International Symposium «Thermophysics(90». Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1991, v. 2, pp. 400-403 (in Russian).
19. Kawahara A., Chung P.M.Y., Kawaji M. Investigation of Two-Phase Flow Pattern, Void Fraction and Pressure Drop in a Microchannel. Int. J. Multiphase Flow. 2002, v. 28, pp. 1411-1435.
20. Tran T.N., Wambsganss M.W., France D.M. Small circular and rectangular channel boiling with two refrigerants. Int. J. Multiphase Flow. 1996, v. 22 (3), pp. 485-498.
21. Xu B., Ooi K.T., Wong N.T., Choi W.K. Experimental Investigation of Flow Friction for Liquid Flow in Microchannels. Int. Comm. Heat Mass Transfer. 2000, v. 27, no. 8, pp. 1165-1176.
22. Kirillov P.L., Bogoslovskaya G.P. Heat Transfer in Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2000. 456 p. (in Russian).
23. Isachenko V.P., Osipova V.A., Sukomel A.S. Heat Transfer. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981. 415 p. (in Russian).
24. Tong L. Boiling Crisis and Critical Heat Flux. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1976. 100 p.