+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/10.pdf"
first_page="106"
last_page="117"
udc="546.15 (438+437):621.039.586(477.41)"
title="Radioecological Modeling of the Dynamics of 131I Activity in Different Types of Grass Vegetation in the Year of the Chernobyl Accident"
original_title="Радиоэкологическое моделирование динамики активности 131I в травяной растительности разных видов в год аварии на ЧАЭС"
authors=["VlasovOK", "ZvonovaIA", "KrajewskiP", "SchukinaNV", "ChekinSYu", "TumanovKA"]
tags=["agro-radioecological model", "Chernobyl accident", "IAEA’s EMRAS project", "‘Warsaw’ scenario", "instrumental data", "estimated data", "mutually consistent database", "atmosphere", "rainfall", "137Cs fallout", "131I in vegetation"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.10"

+++

The dynamics of the grass fodder and food crop crude biomass in Mazovia in the year of the Chernobyl disaster has been calculated. Densities of the 137Cs и 131I fallout on soil and grass have been studied as a function of rainfall and biomass density as of the time most of the fallout took place. A method is described to convert the instrumental data for the radionuclide activity dynamics in vegetation of one type to vegetation of other types. The results of such data conversion from lawn grass to other types of food and fodder grass vegetation are presented. A method is described for adjusting the dynamics of the radionuclide transport through the food chain components (pasture grass, green meat – milk – human body) by normalizing successively the estimated data in every next component for the average value of the instrumental data ratio to the estimated data in the previous component. The proposed methods are intended to form a mutually consistent base of estimated and reconstructed instrumental data: 137Cs and 131I activity in the atmosphere – rainfall – 137Cs fallout density on terrain – specific activity of 131I in vegetation. Such radioecological database will provide for a longer reliability of the estimated 131I specific activity dynamics in milk and in human body and, in the long run, in estimating the thyroid internal exposure doses.

### References

1. Vlasov O.K., Krajewski P., Bartuskova M., Malatova I., Shchukina N.V., Chekin S.Yu., Tumanov K.A., Zvonova I.A. The creation and verification of a mutually agreed database of input information of the simulation model of transport of radionuclides 137Cs and 131I along the food chain on instrumental radioecological data (based on the materials of the «Prague» and «Warsaw» scenarios of the IAEA EMRAS project). Radiatsiya i Risk. 2019, v. 28, no. 3, pp. 5-23; DOI: https://doi.org/0131-3878-2019-28-3-5-23 (in Russian).
2. Environmental Modelling for Radiation Safety (EMRAS): a summary report of the results of the EMRAS programme (2003–2007). IAEA-TECDOC-1678. Vienna. IAEA, 2012. 60 p.
3. Krajewski P., Ammann M., Bartuskova M., Duffa C., Filistovic V., Homma T., Kanyar B., Malatova I., Nedveckaite T., Simon S., Vlasov O., Webbe-Wood D., Zvonova I. Validation of environmental transfer models and assessment of the effectiveness of countermeasures using data on 131I releases from Chernobyl. Appl. Radiat. Isot. 2008, v. 66, no. 11, pp. 1730-1735; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apradiso.2007.11.022 .
4. Bartuskova M., Malatova I., Berkovskyy V., Krajewski P., Ammann M., Filistovic V., Homma T., Horyna J., Kanyar B., Nedveckaite T., Vlasov O., Zvonova I. Radioecological assessments of the Iodine working group of IAEA’s EMRAS programme: Presentation of input data and analysis of results of the Prague scenario. Radioprotection. 2009, v. 44, no. 5, pp. 295-300. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/radiopro/20095057 .
5. Zvonova I., Krajewski P., Berkovsky V., Ammann M., Duffa C., Filistovic V., Homma T., Kanyar B., Nedveckaite T., Simon S.L., Vlasov O., Webbe-Wood D. Validation of 131I ecological transfer models and thyroid dose assessments using Chernobyl fallout data from the Plavsk district, Russia. J. Environ. Radioact. 2010, v. 101, no. 1, pp. 8-15; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2009.08.005 .
6. Vlasov O.K., Krajewski P., Zvonova I.A., Malatova I., Bartuskova M., Schukina N.V., Chekin S.Yu., Tumanov K.A. Verification of radioecological models to the instrumental data of the specific activity 131I in a grass in Mazovia and Bohemia after the Chernobyl accident (from «Prague» and «Warsaw» scenarios of the IAEA project EMRAS). Radiacionnaya Gigiena. 2019, v. 12, no. 4, pp. 6-17; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2019-12-4-6-17 (in Russian).
7. Vlasov O.K. Radioecological model for transport of radioiodine and radiocesium in the food chains after radiological accidents and discharge of radioactive substances to atmosphere for study of mechanism of formation of internal radiation doses to population. Part 1. Description, formulation and properties of agroclimatic model. Radiatsiya i Risk. 2013, v. 22, no. 2, pp. 16-34 (in Russian).