+++

categories="article"
date="2020-11-19T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2020-04"
issue_name="2020 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/04/11.pdf"
first_page="117"
last_page="129"
udc="621.039.31"
title="Multi-Criteria Approaches to Economic Optimization of Cascade Schemes for Recycled Uranium Enrichment"
original_title="Многокритериальные подходы к экономической оптимизации каскадных схем обогащения регенерированного урана"
authors=["RodionovaEV", "NevinitsaVA", "SmirnovAYu"]
tags=["double cascade", "separate work units", "optimization", "economy", "natural real indicators", "recycled uranium", "close fuel cycle", "natural uranium"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.4.11"

+++

The possibility of multiple using of regenerated uranium is presented in the article. Additional regenerate enrichment is carried out using a modified double cascade. An algorithm for selecting a set of cascade parameters is proposed. It minimizes the consumption of natural uranium, separation operations, and the minimum amount of highly enriched fraction sent to waste.

The article considers the possibility of using multiple use of reсycled uranium. It is shown that the problem of purifying recycled uranium from the 232U isotope can be solved by using double cascade schemes. Since approximately the same neutron-physical properties of the fuel of a light-water reactor of the VVER-1200 type can be obtained with a very large combination of enrichment values pairs of the first and second stages, the main problem is to choose the optimal parameters of the cascade scheme (the values of the enrichment of the first and second stages). In this study, we consider the problem of choosing the optimal parameters of the enrichment cascade by the example of fabrication a set of fuel assemblies for reloading a single VVER-1200 reactor. Additional enrichment of the recycled uranium is carried out using a modified double cascade. A multi-criteria algorithm for selecting a set of cascade parameters is proposed, which minimizes the consumption of natural uranium, the separation work expenditures, and the minimum amount of the highly enriched 235U fraction sent to waste along with the 232U isotope extracted from recycled uranium. It is shown that the mass of the highly enriched fraction contaminated with the 232U isotope (i.e., the fraction containing waste of the recycled uranium purification from the 232U isotope) decreases, as well as the loss of the 235U isotope with an increase in the enrichment value of the second stage from 20% to 90%.

### References

1. Villani S. Uranium Enrichment. Мoscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 320 p. (in Russian).
2. Uranium 2007: Resources, Production and Demand. OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency, OECD 2008 NEA, iss. 6345.
3. Solovyeva A.P., Ulyanin Yu.A., Kharitonov V.V., Yupshina D.Yu. About the value of SNF as a raw material for fuel for thermal neutron reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 140-152; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.12 (in Russian).
4. Dudnikov A.A., Nevinitsa V.A., Chibinyaev A.V., Proselkov V.N., Smirnov A.Yu., Sulaberidze G.A. Complex Approach to Study Physical Features of Uranium Multiple Recycling in Light Water Reactors. IAEA-CN-178/12-02. Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Management of Spent Fuel from Nuclear Power Reactors. Vienna, Austria, 2010. IAEA, Vienna, Austria (on CD-ROM).
5. Smirnov A.Yu., Sulaberidze G.A., Dudnikov A.A., Nevinitsa V.A., Proselkov V.N., Chibinyaev A.V., Alekseev P.N. Evolution of isotopic composition of reprocessed uranium during the multiple recycling in light water reactors with natural uranium feed. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2012, v. 75, iss. 13, pp. 1616-1625.
6. Kislov A.I., Titov A.A., Dmitriev A.M., Sintsov F.E., Romanov A.V. Radiation issues of implementation of recycled uranium at JSK «MSZ» under fuel fabrication conditions. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost. 2012, spec. iss., pp.52-59 (in Russian).
7. Orlov A.A., Kravchenko A.V., Titov E.S., Lebedev A.Ya. Review of promising methods of uranium recycling in the nuclear-fuel cycle. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 2015, v. 58, iss. 2/2, pp. 35-40 (in Russian).
8. Prusakov V.N., Sazykin A.A., Sosnin L.Yu. Correction of the isotopic composition of regenerated uranium by 232U using the centrifugal method with the introduction of a carrier gas. Atomnaya Energiya. 2008, v. 105, iss. 3, pp. 150-156 (in Russian).
9. Palkin V.A. Purification of regenerated uranium in cascades with 235U enrichment up to 5%. Atomnaya Energiya. 2013, v. 115, iss. 1, pp. 28-33 (in Russian).
10. Palkin V.A., Maslyukov E.V. Purification of regenerated uranium in the additional selection of the R-cascade and its enrichment in the ordinary cascade. Teoreticheskie Osnovy Khimicheskoy Tekhnologii. 2016, v. 50, iss. 5, pp. 711-717 (in Russian).
11. Smirnov A.Y., Sulaberidze G.A. Enrichment of regenerated uranium with simultaneous dilution of 232-236U with natural raw materials and waste uranium. Atomnaya Energiya. 2014, v. 117, iss. 1, pp. 36-42 (in Russian).
12. Smirnov A.Yu., Nevinitsa V.A., Fomichenko P.A., Gusev V.E., Sulaberidze G.A. Enrichment of regenerated uranium in a double cascade of gas centrifuges with its full return to fuel reproduction. Vestnik NIYaU MIFI. 2018, v. 7, no. 6, pp. 449-457 (in Russian).
13. Rodionova E.V., Nevinitsa V.A., Smirnov A.Yu. Fuel cycle of Light Water Reactor with Full Consumption of Recycled Uranium. KERNTECHNIK. 2020, v. 85, iss. 4, pp. 314-320.
14. Volkov Yu.N., Gusev V.E., Smirnov A.Yu., Sulaberidze G.A., Blandinsky V.Yu., Nevinitsa V.A., Fomichenko P.A. Protection of Light-Water Reactor Fuel Export Deliveries with Regenerated Uranium in Terms of IAEA Safeguards. Atomnaya Energiya. 2020, v. 128, iss. 6, pp. 337-343 (in Russian).