+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="14"
udc="621.039.566"
title="Development and Validation of the Software Tool «Interactive Unit Startup Procedure» as Part of Implementation of the Operator Information Support System at NVNPP"
original_title="Разработка и валидация программного средства «Интерактивная процедура пуска энергоблока» в рамках реализации системы информационной поддержки оператора на НВАЭС"
authors=["TuchkovMYu", "PovarovPV", "TikhonovAI", "MayorovaMM"]
tags=["operator information support system", "interactive procedure", "information", "alarm", "functions", "validation"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.01"

+++

This article is focused on the current issue of developing an operator information support system (OISS) for the Novovoronezh NPP-2 project. One of the main reasons to raise this topic is the MCR operator’s overload with data due to the greatly increased information flows related to the VVER-1200 Process I&C compared to the serially produced VVER-1000 power units. The other important reason, in the authors’ opinion, is the increased volume of existing procedures in hard copy due to the strengthened requirements for their registration and attempts to describe all possible failures and deviations in the programs and plant evolution sheet, work on them becomes complicated. In the era of ubiquitous digitalization, the paper procedures can only distract the attention of the operator overloaded with information. The obvious solution is to create a system providing automatic collection and analysis of information. In addition, the functionality of the operator information support system allows the use of operating experience, thus minimizing the impact of the human factor. The lack of knowledge or experience could be especially challenging with procedures being applied infrequently, for example, for starting up and shutting down the unit. The article deals with the development and functionality of interactive procedures and applicable requirements. During the development of the software product, special attention was paid to the ergonomics of the workplace and the convenience of operating personnel working according to an interactive procedure. Since the transition from the paper version of the programs can cause problems with reading the procedures and, ultimately, lead to the failure of the unit start-up time, the personnel of the operating station were directly involved in the development of interactive programs. Based on the review results, conclusions were made about the correctness of the approaches in developing the interactive procedures and validated solutions to be disseminated for all routine operations.

### References

1. Kulikova E.A. Stresses in Professional Activity: Causes of Occurrence and Ways of Overcoming. Nauchno(metodicheskiy Elektronnyj Zhurnal «Kontsept». 2019, no. 10 (October). Available at: http//e-koncept.ru/2019/192039.htm (accessed Nov. 12, 2020) (in Russian).
2. Anokhin A.N. Adaptive interface for operators of complex systems. Proc. of the XII(th All(Russian meeting on control problems VSPU(2014. Moscow, June 16-19, 2014, pp. 6345-6256 (in Russian).
3. NP-001-15. Federal Rules and Regulations in the Area of Atomic Energy Use. General Safety Provisions for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Federal Environmental, Industrial and Nuclear Supervision Service of Russia Publ., 2015, 74 p. Available at: http://vol-nrs.gosnadzor.ru/about/documents/%D0%9F%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B5%D1%87%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%8C%20%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%B9%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B2%D1%83%D1%8E%D1%89%D0%B8%D1%85%20%D0%A4%D0%9D%D0%9F/%D0%A4%D0%9D%D0%9F%201-20/%D0%9D%D0%9F-001-15.pdf (accessed Nov. 12, 2020) (in Russian).
4. NP-082-07. Federal Rules and Regulations in the Area of Atomic Energy Use. Nuclear Safety Rules for Reactor Installations of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Rostechnadzor Publ., 2007. Available at: http://vol-nrs.gosnadzor.ru/about/documents%D0%9F%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B5%D1%87%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%8C%20%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%B9%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B2%D1%83%D1%8E%D1%89%D0%B8%D1%85%20%D0%A4%D0%9D%D0%9F/%D0%A4%D0%9D%D0%9F%2081-100/%D0%9D%D0%9F-082-07.pdf (accessed Nov. 12, 2020) (in Russian).
5. RB-152-18. Safety Guide for the Use of Atomic Energy. Comments to the federal rules and regulations «General Provisions for Ensuring the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants» (NP-001-15). Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB», 2018, 205 p. (in Russian).
6. GOST R MEK 60964-2012. Nuclear Power Plants Control Rooms. Design. Мoscow. Standardinform Publ., 2014. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200101819 (accessed Nov. 12, 2020) (in Russian).
7.Anokhin F.N., Kalinushkin A.E., Gorbaev V.A., Sivokon V.P. Current State and Trends of NPP Operator Support Systems. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 5-16 (in Russian).
8. Mashin V.A. Computerized Support Systems for NPP Operators (Psychological Problems). Elektricheskie Stantsii. 1995, no. 7, pp. 2-7 (in Russian).
9. Anokhin A.N., Ostreykovsky V.A. Ergonomics in Nuclear Power. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2001, 344 p. (in Russian).
10. Gusev I.N., Povarov V.P., Tuchkov M.Yu., Kuzhil A.S., Mayorova M.M., Padun S.P. About the Smart Help to the Operators in State-of-the-art Process I&C for VVER Type Reactors. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost’. 2019, no. 1, pp. 46-54 (in Russian).
11. Bashlykov A.A., Eremeev A.P. Expert Systems for Decision Support in the Energy Sector. Moscow. MEI Publ., 1994, 216 p. (in Russian).
12. Anokhin A.N. Problems of the Organization of the Man-Machine Interface of the NPP ACS. Doklady BGUIR. 2015, pp. 104-108 (in Russian).
13. Podshibyakin M.A., Vasin V.M., Germash M.M., Strebnev N.A., Martynov A.V., Podshibyakin A.K. Issues of the Concept of Creating a System for Representing the Safety Parameters of VVER RP. Proc. of the VIII(th International Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPP with VVER». Podolsk, Russia, May 28-31, 2013.
14. GOST R MEK 62241-2012. Nuclear Power Plants. Main Control Room. Alarm Functions and Presentation. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2014. Available at: http://certatom.kiev.ua/images/files/tk/ GOST_R_MEK_62241-A-OkR.pdf (accessed Nov. 12, 2020) (in Russian).