+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/02.pdf"
first_page="16"
last_page="25"
udc="621.039.566"
title="Simulating Operation of Novovoronezh NPP(2 Power Units with Two Disabled Feeding Pumps and without Enabling the Backup Feeding Pump"
original_title="Моделирование режима с отключением двух питательных электронасосов без включения резервного на энергоблоках Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["GusevIN", "KozlovskyMN", "VorobyovAP", "PadunSP"]
tags=["VVER-1200", "power unit simulation", "control algorithm", "dynamic stability", "tests", "electric feeding pump"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.02"

+++

An urgent task is to ensure and improve the power unit dynamic stability based on the results of calculating the neutronic and thermophysical processes occurring in the core and the main systems of the reactor plant. One of the ways to improve the dynamic stability of the NPP power unit is to optimize the algorithms for controlling the main equipment, including the development and implementation of proposals for adjusting the existing process protections and interlocks.

The article analyzes the operation of Unit 1 and 2 of the Novovoronezh Nuclear Power Plant II (equipped with VVER-1200 reactors) with two disabled feeding pumps and without enabling the backup feeding pump. These operating conditions are subsequently simulated using the Power Unit Simulation Software/Hardware Package (PUSS/HP) developed by LLC «IF SNIIP ATOM».

The objective of this work is to check the reliability of the forecasts of variations in the power unit parameters obtained using the PUSS/HP based on operational data.

The simulated power unit parameter variations in transient conditions are in good agreement with the data collected in operational tests. During the simulation, the power unit dynamic stability is preserved, i.e., the operational parameters are within the design limits and do not exceed the protection operation settings.

The results of the work suggest the possibility of using current NPP power unit simulations for:
– developing proposals for adjusting the operation control algorithms in case of malfunctions and emergency modes with the main equipment shutdown and power unit protection actuation;
– verifying design solutions for updating NPP power unit systems, which is associated with the use of new equipment or changes in flow diagrams.

Current power unit simulations can be applied both for existing power units and for new ones that are being commissioned.

### References

1. Kazakov V.A., Zhudenkov V.V., Kazakov K.V., Povarov V.P., Vitkovskiy I.L. Increasing the dynamical stability of NPP power units with VVER-1000 reactors. Teploenergetika. 2014, v. 61, no. 1, pp. 47-53 (in Russian).
2. Gusev I.N., Kazanskiy V.R., Vitkovskiy I.L. Dynamical stability of a power unit with VVER1200 reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 22-32. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.02 (in Russian).
3. Filipchuk Yu.D. Evaluating performance of fast turbine valving control for increasing dynamical stability. Energetika. Izvestiya Vysshih Uchebnyh Zavedeniy i Energeticheskih Obyedineniy SNG. 2012, no. 3, pp. 40-43 (in Russian).
4. Kamnev V.N., Podshibyakin A.K., Podshibyakin M.A., Konoplev N.P. Methodology and results of VVER reactor unit dynamical stability analysis. Proc. of the VII-th International Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPP with VVER», Podolsk, 2011. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/mntk2011/documents/mntk2011-114.pdf (accessed Nov. 10, 2020) (in Russian).
5. Podshibyakin M.A., Konoplev N.P., Gorohov A.K., Novak I.V., Boginskiy A.P. The requirements for NPP manoeuvring characteristics and aspects of fulfilling them for the new-design VVER units. Proc. of the IV-th International Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPP with VVER», Podolsk, 2005. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/mntk2005/Конференция/ФГУП_ОКБ_ГИДРОПРЕСС/16_Подшибякин М.А.pdf (accessed Nov. 10, 2020) (in Russian).
6. NP-001-15. General Safety Provisions for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow: Federal Environmental, Industrial and Nuclear Supervision Service of Russia Publ., 2015, 74 p. (in Russian).
7. Krushelnitskiy V.N., Topchiyan R.M. Preliminary Safety Analysis Report. General Overview of the Nuclear Power Plant. Novovoronezh NPP12, Power Unit 1. Moscow. FGUP Atomenergoproekt Publ., 2007, 120 p. (in Russian).
8. Safety of Nuclear Power Plants: Design. IAEA Safety Standards Series. No. NS-R-1. Vienna: IAEA, 2003, 67 p.
9. Asmolov V.G., Gusev I.N., Kazanskiy V.R., Povarov V.P., Statsura D.B. New generation first of the kind unit – VVER 1200 design features. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 5-21; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.01 (in Russian).
10. Gusev I.N., Solovev B.L., Padun P.P., Mayorova M.M. System development of intelligent operator support at unit No. 1 of the Novovoronezh NPP-2. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 3, pp. 5-15; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.01 (in Russian).
11. Novovoronezh NPP-2. Design AES2006. Available at: http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed Nov. 10, 2020) (in Russian).
12. Rabinovich E.Z. Hydraulics. Moscow. Nedra Publ., 1977, 304 p. (in Russian).
13. Report on Power Unit Mathematical Model Validation using VVER11200 Operating Data No. 0136.001.20 OV. Moscow. OOO «IF SNIIP ATOM» Publ., 2020 (in Russian).