+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/03.pdf"
first_page="27"
last_page="37"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Effect of the Burnable Absorber Arrangement on the VVER(1200 Fuel Assembly Neutronic Performance"
original_title="Влияние размещения выгорающего поглотителя на нейтронно-физические характеристики тепловыделяющей сборки ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["VnukovRA", "KolesovVV", "ZhavoronkovaIA", "KotovYA", "PramanikMR"]
tags=["burnable absorber", "optimal profiling", "fuel assembly", "neutron flux density", "Monte Carlo method"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.03"

+++

Optimizing the use of fuel in a power reactor is a task of current concern. However, little attention has been given to investigating the dependences among the enrichment used, the content of gadolinium oxide in fuel rods, and the life time in combination with evaluating the efficiency of using Gd loaded fuel elements with different Gd2O3 contents. The paper considers fuel assembly versions for VVER-1200 reactors having different enrichments for fuel elements, including those with Gd, and different contents of gadolinium oxide in fuel. A comparative analysis is presented for assemblies with homogeneous Gd2O3 arrangements in each fuel element and with profiled Gd2O3 arrangements. In the latter case, profiling depends on the neutron flux density in the layer which includes fuel elements with Gd. This suggests that the arrangement of gadolinium oxide proportionally to the neutron flux density will improve the FA neutronic performance. The results were obtained using SERPENT (a continuous-energy multi-purpose three-dimensional Monte Carlo particle transport code). The assemblies with the used parameters for a 12-month fuel cycle have shown the method under consideration to be inefficient for a period of over 300 eff. days. With an increased enrichment of the gadolinium oxide contained, the use of profiled versions has turned out to be more rational for longer periods (up to 900 eff. days). Therefore, this phenomenon is relevant for the reactor life whereas it proves to be insignificant for the fuel life. It is emphasized that the complex relationship between the content of gadolinium and uranium in the assembly and the effective multiplication factor for the profiled assembly and the initial assembly should be considered in detail.

### References

1. Abu Sondos M.A., Demin V.M. and Savander V.I. The Effect of Burnable Absorber (Gd and Eu) on the Neutron-Physics Characteristic of Fuel Assemblies of VVER-1000 Reactor. IOP Conference Series: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. – 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/0.1088/1742-6596/1189/1/012003.
2. Abu Sondos M.A., Demin V.M., Savander V.I. Reduction of Boron Reactivity Reserve Control when using a Gd2 O3-based Burnup Absorber in the VVER-1200 Reactor Fuel. Global’naya Yadernaya Bezopasnost’. 2019, no. 3 (32), pp. 56-65; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/gns-2019-03-06 (in Russian).
3. Abu Sondos M.A., Demin V.M., Smirnov A.D. Comparative Analysis of Neutronic Characteristics of Nuclear Fuel Produced by Westinghouse and Fuel Rods for VVER-1000-type Reactors by SERPENT Code. Global’naya Yadernaya Bezopasnost’. 2019, no. 2 (31), pp. 103-109; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/GNS-2019-02-12 (in Russian).
4. Frybortova L. Recommended Strategy and Limitations of Burnable Absorbers used in VVER Fuel Assemblies. Nuclear Science and Technology. 2019 v. 30, no. 8, p. 14; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41365-019-0651-x.
5. Khoshahval F., Foroutan S. S., Zolfaghari A., Minuchehr H. Evaluation of Burnable Absorber Rods Effect on Neutronic Performance in Fuel Assembly of VVER-1000 Reactor. Annals of Nuclear Engeneering. 2016, v. 87, pp. 648-658; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2015.10.012. 
6. Saad H.M., Refeat R., Aziz M., Mansour H. Effect of Axial Distribution of Gadolinium Burnable Poison in Advanced Pressurized Water Reactor Assembly. Nuclear and Radiation Safety Journal. 2019, v. 84, no. 4, pp. 46-53; DOI: https://doi.org/10.32918/nrs.2019.4(84).06.
7. Iwasaki K., Matsui T., Yanai K., Yuda R., Arita Y., Nagasaki T., Yokoyama N., Tokura I., Une K., Harada K. Effect of Gd2 O3 Dispersion on the Thermal Conductivity of UO2. Nuclear Science and Technology. 2009, v. 46, no. 7, pp. 673-676.
8. Slivin A.A., Anikin M.N., Chertkov Yu.B. Possibility of Alternative Burnup Absorbers in VVER-type Nuclear Reactors. Proc. of the Conf. «Actual Problems of Innovative Development of Nuclear Technologies», March 21-25, 2016. Seversk. Federal State Educational Institution of Higher Professional Education «NIYaU MIFI». Seversk Institute of Technology Publ., 2016, p. 51 (in Russian).
9. Kryukov F.N., Lyadov G.D., Nikitin O.N. Investigation of the Fuel State of Thermal Neutron Reactors by Electron-Probe Microanalysis. VANT. Ser: Fizika Yadernykh Reactorov. 2005, iss. 5, pp. 94-103 (in Russian).
10. SERPENT – MCRPBCC. Available at: http://montecarlo.vtt.fi (accessed Nov. 06, 2020).
11. Leppaanen J., Pusa M., Viitanen T., Valtavirta V., Kaltiaisenaho T. The SERPENT Monte Carlo Code: Status, Development and Applications in 2013. Ann. Nucl. Energy. Elsevier Ltd. 2015, v. 82, pp. 142-150. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2014.08.024 .
12. Stefanova S., Chantoin P. and Kolev I.G. VVER Reactor Fuel Performance. Modelling and Experimental Support. Proc. of the International Seminar held in St. Constantine, Varna, Bulgaria on 7-11 Nov. 1994. Varna, Bulgaria, 1994, 260 p. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/28/031/28031101.pdf (accessed Nov. 06, 2020).
13. Operation and Licensing of Mixed Cores in Water Cooled Reactors. Vienna. IAEA, 2013, 90 p. (IAEA-TECDOC series, ISSN 1011-4289; no. 1720). Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE-1720_web.pdf (accessed Nov. 06, 2020).
14. Advanced Fuel Pellet Materials and Fuel Rod Design for Water Cooled Reactors. Proc. of the Technical Committee Meeting on 23-26 Nov. 2009. Villigen. IAEA, 2009, 241 p. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/te_1654_web.pdf (accessed Nov. 06, 2020).
15. Status Report for Advanced Nuclear Reactor Designs – Report 108 «VVER-1200 (V491) (VVER-1200 (V-491))». International Atomic Energy Agency. Vienna, Austria. IAEA, 2011, 32 p. Available at: http://www.iaea.org/NuclearPower/Downloadable/aris/2013/36.VVER-1200(V-491).pdf (accessed Nov. 06, 2020).