+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/08.pdf"
first_page="83"
last_page="94"
udc="621.039.586"
title="Damping Structures as Part of the Protective Shells of Nuclear Fuel Cycle Facilities"
original_title="Демпфирующие конструкции в составе защитных оболочек объектов ЯТЦ"
authors=["SobolevAV", "OleynikovSA"]
tags=["safety of nuclear fuel cycle facilities", "impact of the flying body", "beyond design basis accident", "aircraft crash", "protective shell", "damping structures"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.08"

+++

The material considers the threat of falling or hitting a flying object (aircraft, rocket, unmanned vehicle, object raised by a hurricane, cargo being moved) at the enterprises of the nuclear industry. Such enterprises can include both nuclear power units and enterprises for nuclear fuel production, reprocessing or storage of spent nuclear fuel or radioactive waste. The consequences of such impacts can be catastrophic. It is indicated that taking into account the prospects for the development of nuclear energy and the increase in the number of facilities working with radioactive substances, these dangers will become increasingly significant.

The timeload dependences of different types of aircraft are presented, as well as methods and recommendations for their accounting in the calculations of protective shells according to the standards of the IAEA and other sources. The types and features of protective shells for nuclear fuel cycle facilities and their disadvantages are described. The features of the processes occurring under shortterm dynamic loads with rigid monolithic concrete structures are described. These processes can lead to the failure of equipment working with radioactive substances.

The idea of creating damping, collapsing structures as part of the protective shell, which will absorb part of the kinetic energy due to their destruction and reduce the impulse loads on the equipment caused by the oscillatory process following the impact, is presented. A qualitative analysis of this approach is performed from the point of view of ensuring protective properties and economic feasibility.

### References

1. Houthi drone attacks on 2 Saudi Aramco oil facilities spark fires. Available at: https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/09/drones-hit-saudi-aramco-facilities-fires-190914051900472.html (accessed Feb. 12, 2021).
2. Rachkov V.I. Strategies for the Development of Nuclear Power in Russia. Proc. of the Russian Scientific and Practical Conference «Improving the Reliability and Efficiency of Power Plants and Energy Systems» – ENERGY-2010 (Moscow, June 1-3, 2010). Moscow. MEI Publishing House, 2010, v.1, pp. 21-24 (in Russian).
3. Official website of the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation. Report on the implementation of Russia’s Energy Strategy for the period up to 2030 based on the results of 2018. Available at: https://minenergo.gov.ru/node/1026 (accessed Feb. 12, 2021).
4. Accidents and catastrophes. Prevention and elimination of consequences. Training manual in 6 volumes. Ed. V.A. Kotlyarevsky, A.V. Zabegaev. Moscow. Assoc. Stroit. Vuzov Publ., 1995-2003, v. 1, pp. 168-183 (in Russian).
5. Bauer J. Analysis of Reinforced Concrete Structures Subjected to Aircraft Impact Loading. Transactions of the VII%th International Conference on Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology, J9/4, Seiten 423-430, 1983.
6. Full-Scale Aircraft Test for Calculation of Impact Force. Ed. Sugano T. et al. Nucl. Engng. and Des. 1993, v. 140, pp. 373-385.
7. External Human-Induced Events in Site Evaluation for Nuclear Power Plants. IAEA Safety Standards Series. Safety Guide No. NS-G 3.1. International Atomic Energy Agency. Vienna, 2002, 49 p.
8. NP-064-17. Accounting of External Natural and Man-Induced Impacts on Nuclear Facilities. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ., 2018, 70 p. (in Russian).
9. Arkhipov S.B. Probabilistic Analysis of the Vibration Strength of Building Structures of NPP Buildings Under the Impact of an Airplane. Cand. Sci. (Tech.) Diss. St Petersburg State Technical University, 2000, 138 p. (in Russian).
10. PiNAE 5.6. Construction Design Standards for NPPs with different Types of Reactor. Moscow. Minatomjenergo RF Publ., 1986, 21 p. (in Russian).
11. Rules for the Design and Construction of Nuclear Island Structures with a REP type Reactor (with Pressurized Water): RCC G. Paris. Electricite de France Publ., July 1988, 115 p.
12. IAEA Safety Standards for protecting people and the environment. Safety Guide No. GS-G-3.5 The Management System for Nuclear Installations. IAEA, Vienna, 2014, 183 p.
13. Novozhilov Yu.V., Mihaljuk D.S., Feoktistova L.Yu. Calculation of the Load on the Nuclear Island of Nuclear Power Plant’s Buildings in the Event of an Aircraft Strike. Vychislitel’naja mehanika sploshnyh sred. 2018, v.11, no.3, pp. 288-301 (in Russian).
14. Richtlinie fur den Schutz von Kernkraftwerken gegen Druckwellen aus chemishen Reaktionen durch Auslegung der Kernkraftwerke hin- sichtlich ihrer Festigkeit. Bundesanzeiger. 1976, no. 179, pp. 1-3. Bonn (Sep. 9,1976).
15. Popov N.N., Rastorguev B.S. Dynamic Calculation of Reinforced Concrete Structures. Moscow. Strojizdat Publ., 1974, 207 p. (in Russian).
16. Lamzin D.A. High-Speed Deformation and Destruction of Fine-Grained Concrete. Cand. Sci. (Tech.) Diss. Lobachevsky State University of Nizhny Novgorod, 2014, 161 p. (in Russian).
17. Volkodav I.A. Methodology for Assessing the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants in the Event of Impacts of Collapsing Objects. Cand. Sci. (Tech.) Diss. St Petersburg State Polytechnical University, 2011, 167 p. (in Russian).
18. Rosatom: History and Modernity. Encyclopedia of the Nuclear Industry. Available at: http://edu.strana-rosatom.ru/ (accessed Feb. 12, 2021).
19. Nuclear Containments: State-of-art Report. Stuttgart. Federation internationale du beton, 2001, 117 p.
20. International Atomic Energy Agency, Ageing Management of Concrete Structures in Nuclear Power Plants, Nuclear Energy Series No. NP-T-3.5. Vienna, 2016, 355 p.