+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/09.pdf"
first_page="96"
last_page="104"
udc="621.039.74"
title="Ensuring Radiation Safety during Temporary Storage of Solidified Radioactive Wastes in Light Hangar-Type Facilities"
original_title="Обеспечение радиационной защиты при временном хранении отверждённых радиоактивных отходов в хранилищах ангарного типа"
authors=["RosnovskySV", "PovarovVP"]
tags=["radioactive wastes", "temporary storage", "hangar-type storage", "radiation package", "optimization of radiation protection"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.09"

+++

To ensure safe temporary storage of solidified radioactive waste at NPP sites, expensive capital storage facilities with massive engineering structures are traditionally used. This approach is determined by the need to comply with regulatory requirements for limiting the gamma background in the area adjacent to the storage facility.

However, using light hangar-type storage facilities, it is possible to optimize the costs of temporary storage of solidified radioactive wastes. At the same time, the safety of storage, including the radiation protection of the personnel, the public and the environment, is undoubtedly ensured through the use of special organizational and technical solutions.

The Novovoronezh NPP, a branch of Rosenergoatom Concern JSC, successfully operates light hangar-type storage facilities for temporary storage of solidified radioactive wastes classified as medium-level wastes in accordance with OSPORB-99/2009. During operation, a methodology and method for conditioning and temporary storage of solidified radioactive wastes were developed to ensure the transfer of radioactive wastes to final disposal without additional technological operations and unreasonable costs.

A methodology has been developed for assessing the radiation situation around storage facilities during temporary storage of radioactive wastes as well as a software package for predicting the radiation situation when it is necessary to make a decision on the layout of the storage peripheral rows

### References

1. Sobolev A.I. Safe handling of radioactive waste: current activities of the IAEA. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2019, no. 2(7), pp. 41-48; DOI: 10.25283/2587-9707-2019-2-41-48 (in Russian).
2. Sorokin V.T., Pavlov D.I. Technologies for final disposial of radioactive waste: European experience and trends. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2018, no. 4 (5), pp. 24-32 (in Russian).
3. Radchenko M.V., Kormilitsyna L.A., Mogulyan V.G., Matyunin Yu.I. Multi-Purpose containers for radioactive waste. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2017, no. 1, pp. 75-85 (in
Russian).
4. Sorokin V.T., Demin A.V., Kashcheev V.V., Iroshnikov V. V., Gataullin R.M., Medelyaev I.A., Peregudov N. N., Sharafutdinov R.B. Containers for low- and medium-level radioactive waste. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost’. 2013, no. 2 (68), pp. 15-22 (in Russian).
5. Sorokin V.T. Justification of safety of burial of the salt concentrates formed on installations of deep evaporation of the nuclear power plant placed in containers NZK-150-1,5 P. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2019, no. 2 (7), pp. 31-40; DOI: 10.25283/2587-9707-2019-2-31-40 (in Russian).
6. Gataullin R.M., Medelyaev I.A., Butylkin M.T., Sviridov N.V., Podshivalov D.D., Smelkov D.A., Sorokin V.T., Kashcheev V.V., Demin A.V. Installation for Solidification Radioactive Waste. Russian Federation, Patent for Invention RU 113411 U1: IPC G 21F9/00. Application from 27.09.2011 (in Russian).
7. Gataullin R.M., Davidenko N.N., Sviridov N.V. et al. Containers for Low5 and Medium5 Level Radioactive Waste. Ed. V.T. Sorokin. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2012, 256 p. (in Russian).
8. Shvedov A.A., Demin A.V., Zaruchevskaya G.P., Kashcheev V.V., Shidlovskaya T.V. Transport and technological scheme for handling non-returnable protective reinforced concrete containers NZK-150-1.5P. Proc. of the Vth International scientific and practical conference «Radioactive Waste Management». Moscow, 2008 (in Russian).
9. Nalivayko E.M., Rosnovsky S.V. We are Ready to Work with National Operator. Organization of Treatment Approved by the Radioactive Wastes at the Novovoronezh NPP. Rosenergoatom. 2010, no. 8, pp. 32-35 (in Russian).
10. Rosnovsky S.V., Bulka S.K. Prediction of the radiation situation during storage of conditioned Radioactive Wastes in hangar-type storage facilities. Teploenergetika. 2014, iss. 61, no. 2, pp. 47-54; DOI: 10.1134/S0040363614020118 (in Russian).
11. Povarov V.P., Shchukin A.P., Nalivayko E.M., Prytkov A.N., Rosnovsky S.V. Method for Temporary Storage of Radioactive Wastes. Russian Federation, Patent for Invention RU 2530538 C2. Application from 08.06.2012 (in Russian).
12. Rosnovsky S.V., Nalivayko E.M., Melnikov E.S., Trofimov D.V. Automation of the process of conditioning of radioactive waste and optimization of temporary storage of radiation packages. Electrotekhnicheskie Kompleksy i Sistemy Upravleniya. 2014, no. 4, pp. 69-73 (in Russian).
13. Rosnovsky S.V., Parinov M.V. Definition of restrictions and predicted input data of the refined mathematical model of the automated storage of radioactive waste. Proc. of the XVII International scientific and methodological conference «Computer Science: Problems, Methodology, Technologies». 2017, pp. 329-331 (in Russian).
14. Parinov M.V., Rosnovsky S.V. Automated management of the organization of storage of radioactive waste using mathematical modeling and CAD. Proc. of the II International scientific and practical conference «Virtual Modeling, Prototyping, and Industrial Design». 2016, pp. 183-186 (in Russian).
15. Bulka S.K., Rosnovsky S.V. Experience of Novovoronezh NPP in developing and implementing a Unified automated system for accounting and control of radiation sources and radioactive waste. Teploenergetika. 2014, iss. 61, no. 2, pp. 76-83; DOI: 10.1134/S0040363614020027 (in Russian).