+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/10.pdf"
first_page="106"
last_page="116"
udc="615.849.12"
title="Application of the Fricke Chemical Dose Meter and its Modifications for Dosimetry of Gamma-Neutron Radiation of a Pulse Reactor"
original_title="Применение химического дозиметра Фрикке и его модификаций для дозиметрии гамма-нейтронного излучения импульсного реактора"
authors=["PotetnyaVI", "KoryakinaEV", "TroshinaMV", "KoryakinSN"]
tags=["Fricke ferrous sulphate dosimeter", "fast neutrons", "gamma radiation", "ultra-high dose rate", "BARS-6 pulse reactor"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.10"

+++

The authors of the paper have studied the characteristics of the Fricke chemical
dosimeter (of the standard composition (D1), without adding NaCl to the solution (D2),
without NaCl and with a 10-fold increased concentration of Fe2+ (D3)) under irradiation
with a dose rate up to 7⋅108 Gy/min at the BARS-6 burst-type reactor with two
unshielded active zones operating either in a single pulse (65 – 70 μ s) mode or in a
stationary (≈ 1 h) mode.

The dosimeter radiosensitivity (i.e., optical density per Gray) depended linearly on the
dose of γ-neutron radiation in the range of 25 – 750 Gy, and was 1.96 ± 0.05 μGy–1 (D1),
2.04 ± 0.05 μGy–1 (D2), 2.08 ± 0.5 μ Gy–1 (D3) in the continuous irradiation mode
and 1.24 ± 0.05μGy–1, 2.00 ± 0.05 μGy–1, 1.94 ± 0.05 μGy–1 in the pulse mode,
respectively. It was ≈ 60% of their sensitivity to γ-radiation of 60Со (3.40 ± 0.02 μGy–1),
but for a standard Fricke dosimeter irradiated in the pulsed mode, it was 1.6 times less, i.e.,
36%. The experimental value of Gn(Fe3+) for all the solutions and both modes of
irradiation varied insignificantly and averaged 0.84 ± 0.11 μM/J except for the
standard solution in the pulsed mode (0.66 ± 0.07 μ M/J). The neutron doses
determined by chemical and activation dosimeters agreed within the error limits, but
the former were systematically higher by ≈ 20%.

Thus, in the range of neutron dose rates of the fission spectrum of 0.4 – 7⋅108 Gy/min,
the effect of the dose rate is absent both in the standard version of the Fricke dosimeter
(without NaCl) and in the modified version (with an increased concentration of Fe2+
ions). It makes possible to use the modified Fricke dosimeter for assessing the physical
and dosimetric characteristics of mixed γ-neutron radiation beams with very high
intensities.

### References

1. Kaprin A.D., Uliyanenko S.E. Hadron Therapy – Development Point. Medicina: Celevye Proekty. 2016, no. 23, pp. 56-59 (in Russian).
2. Vazhenin A.V., Rykovanov G.N. Mokichev G.V., Kandakova E.U., Munasipov Z.Z. Stepanova A.I., Astafjev D.N. Remove Results of Combined Photon-Neutron Therapy of Malignant Tumors of the Head and Neck in the Ural Center of Neutron Therapy. Sibirskiy Onkologicheskij Zhurnal. 2007, v. 24, no. 4, pp. 44-49 (in Russian).
3. Bobkova G.G., Vazhenin A.V., Lukina E.U., Vazhenin I.A., Munacipov Z.Z. Evaluation of Effectiveness of Combined Photon-Neutron Therapy in the Palliative Treatment of Metastatic Brain Tumors. Palliativnaya Meditsina i Reabilitatsiya, 2012, no 3, pp. 36-39 (in Russian).
4. Kandakova E.U. Clinical and Experimental Substantiation of Increasing the Efficiency of Combined Photon#Neutron Therapy of Head and Neck Tumors. Doct. diss. Moscow. FGBU «RNTsRR» Minzdrava Rossii Publ., 2015. 197 p. (in Russian).
5. Musabaeva L.I., Choynzonov E.L., Gribova O.V., Startseva Zh.A., Velikaya V.V., Lisin V.A. Neutron Therapy in the Treatment of Radioresistant Malignant Tumors. Sibirskiy Onkologicheskiy Zhurnal. 2016, v. 15, no 3, pp. 67-71; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21294/1814-4861-2016-15-3-67-71 (in Russian).
6. Gulidov I.A., Mardynskij Yu.S. Hadrons in Radiotherapy of Head and Neck Tumors. Sibirskiy Onkologicheskiy Zhurnal. 2006, no. S1, pp. 37 (in Russian).
7. Tsyb A.F., Uliyanenko S.E., Mardynskij Yu.S., Sokolov V.A., Potetnya V.I., Tsyb T.S., Kapchigashev S.P., Gulidov I.A., Sysoev A.S. Neutrons in the Treatment of Cancer. Obninsk. BIST Publ., 2003, 112 p. (in Russian).
8. Gulidov I.A., Mardynskij Yu.S., Smirnova I.A., Sysoev A.S., Aminov G.G. Combined Photon-Neutron Therapy in Complex Treatment of Patients with Breast Cancer of Stage IIMV. Sibirskiy Onkologicheskiy Zhurnal. 2004, v. 10-11, no. 2-3, pp. 66-69 (in Russian).
9. Koryakina E.V. Cytogenetic Effects of Ultra#High Dose Rate Radiation. Saarbrьcken: LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, 2014. 168 p. (in Russian).
10. Symonds P., Jones G.D.D. FLASH Radiotherapy: The Next Technological Advance in Radiation Therapy. Clinical Oncology. 2019, v. 31, no 7, pp. 405-406; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clon.2019.05.011 .
11. Jin J.-Y., Gu A., Wang W., Oleinick N.L., Machtay M., Kong F.-M. Ultra-High Dose Rate Effect on Circulating Immune Cells: A Potential Mechanism for FLASH Effect? Radiotherapy and Oncology. 2020, v. 149, pp. 55-62; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2020.04.054 .
12. Marlen P., Dahele M., Folkerts M., Abel E., Slotman B.J., Verbakel W. Brinding FLASH to the Clinic: Treatment Planning Considerations for Ultrahigh Dose-rate Proton Beams. International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics. 2020, v. 106, no 3, pp. 621-629; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrobp.2019.11.011 .
13. Pikaev A.K. Dosimetry in Radiation Chemistry. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1975, 312 p. (in Russian).
14. Sokolova I.K. Chemical Dosimetry Methods in Radiobiology. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1972, 120 p. (in Russian). 15.Pikaev A.K., Glazunov P.YA., Spicyn V.I. The Mechanism of Radiolytic Oxidation of Ferrous (II) Iron in Aqueous Sulfuric Acid Solutions Containing Oxygen at High Absorbed Dose Rates. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR. 1963, v. 150, no. 5, pp. 1077-1080 (in Russian).
16. Klassen N.V., Shortt K.R., Seuntjens J., Ross C.K. Fricke dosimetry: the difference between G(Fe3+) for 60Co γ-rays and high-energy x-rays. Physics in Medicine & Biology. 1999, v. 44, pp. 1609-1624; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/44/7/303
17. Prohorov Yu.A., Kononov V.N., Kuvshinchikov M.A., Fokin G.N., Yakubov P.A., Obaturov G.M., Sokolov V.A. Dosimetry on Reactor BARS-6. Atomnaya Energiya. 1998; v. 85, iss. 5, pp. 391-393; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02361103 (in Russian).
18. Bochvar I.A., Viktorov D.V., Tkachenko V.V., Trofimov V.M. Application of the
Thermoluminescent Glass IKS Dosimeters for the Determination of g-radiation Doses in g-neutron Fields. Radiobiologiya. 1972, v. 12, no 6, pp. 938-941 (in Russian).
19. Kapchigashev S.P., Potetnya V.I., Potetnya O.I. Application of ferrosulphate solution in dosimetric research on reactor beams. Atomnaya Energiya. 1984; v. 56, iss. 4, pp. 283-285; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01124201 .
20. Lawson R.C., Porter D. The Response of the Ferrous Sulphate Dosimeter to Neutrons. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 1975; v. 20, no 3, pp. 420-430; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/20/3/006 .
21. Kurachenko Yu.A., Matusevich E.S., Prokhorov Yu.A., Fokin G.N., Yakubov P.A. Experiment Calculated Activation Rate of Nickel Foils in the Reactor Hall of the BARS-6 Pulsed Reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2008, no. 3, pp. 57-64 (in Russian).
22. Greene D., Law J., Major D. The G-value for the ferrous Sulphate Dosimeter for the Radiation from Californium-252. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 1973, v. 18, no 6, pp. 800-807; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/18/6/302 .
23. Autsavapromporn N., Meesungnoen J., Plante I., Jay-Gerin J.P. Monte Carlo Simulation Study of the Effects of Acidity and LET on the Primary Free-Radical and Molecular Yields of Water Radiolysis – Application to the Fricke Dosimeter. Canadian Journal of Chemistry, 2007, v. 85, iss. 3, pp. 214-229; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1139/v07-021 .