+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/11.pdf"
first_page="119"
last_page="129"
udc="621.039.532"
title="Investigations of the Regularities of the Accumulation of Slags Reduced by Hydrogen in the Loops with Lead(Containing Coolants"
original_title="Исследования закономерностей накопления шлаков, восстанавливаемых водородом, в циркуляционных контурах со свинецсодержащими теплоносителями"
authors=["UlyanovVV", "KoshelevMM", "KremlyovaVS", "KharchukSE"]
tags=["lead-containing coolant", "slags based on lead oxides", "lead", "lead-bismuth eutectic", "gaseous oxygen", "lead oxide activity", "Gibbs energy", "hydrogen purification from slags", "oxidation pattern", "backpressure flowing"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.11"

+++

Modern concepts of tank layout and long-term operation with the achievement of maximum installed capacity utilization require scientific confirmation of the safe and economically sound handling of leadcontaining coolants. The article presents a calculated analysis of the regularities of the accumulation of slags during the interaction of lead and lead-bismuth coolants with gaseous oxygen. Oxidation of lead-containing coolants leads to the formation of lead oxide, but the formation of bismuth oxide is unlikely. Metered supply of a gaseous oxidizer to lead-containing coolants makes it possible to selectively oxidize iron, chromium and nickel to their oxides without the formation of slag from solid lead oxide. The authors investigate the regularities of the formation of lead oxide during the interaction of lead-containing coolants with gaseous oxygen. It is found that, when interacting with gaseous oxygen, the lead-bismuth eutectic is oxidized 1.7 times more intensely than lead, which is explained by the presence of bismuth in the alloy. Moreover, bismuth is oxidized more intensively than lead and lead-bismuth eutectic. Excessive pressure of an inert gas during depressurization does not prevent air oxygen from entering the loop, and the dependence of the nitrogen and oxygen flow into the loop on the argon flow from the loop is close to linear regardless of the state of the loop (cold without coolant, heated without coolant, heated with circulating coolant). Oxygen is a chemically active impurity and is absorbed by the loop; therefore, it is important to control nitrogen in the gas volumes of the loops of reactor and research facilities with lead-containing coolants. Due to this, it will be possible to timely signal the supply of oxygen to the loop and take the necessary measures to eliminate or reduce the scale of the formation of slags based on lead oxides

### References

1. Pioro I., Duffey R.B., Kirillov P.L. et al. Current Status and Future Developments in Nuclear-Power Industry of the World. Journal of Nuclear Engineering and Radiation Science. 2019, v. 5, no. 2, p. 27; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4042194.
2. Weeks J.R. Lead, Bismuth, Tin and their Alloys as Nuclear Coolants. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1971, v. 15, no. 4, pp. 363-372.
3. Fleitman A., Weeks J.R. Mercury as a Nuclear Coolant. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1971, v. 16, no. 3, pp. 266-278.
4. Antonovskiy G.M., Voroncov V.E., Votincev I.S. Half Century in Nuclear Engineering. N.Novgorod. KiTizdat Publ., 1997, 303 p. (in Russian).
5. Zrodnikov A.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Vasilenko V.A. Problems and Approaches to the Management of Spent Nuclear Fuel of Liquid Metal Reactors of Nuclear Submarines. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2007, no. 1, pp. 13-22 (in Russian).
6. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Bokov P.A. Technologies and Main Equipment of the Loops of Reactor Plants, Industrial and Research Stands with Lead and Lead5Bismuth Coolants. N.Novgorod. Litera Publ., 2016, 488 p. (in Russian).
7. Efanov A.D., Ivanov K.D., Martynov P.N., Orlov Yu.I. Lead-bismuth coolant technology at nuclear power plants of the first and second generations. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2007, no. 1, pp. 138-144 (in Russian).
8. Gromov B.F., Orlov Yu.I., Toshinsky G.I., Chekunov V.V. Nuclear Power Plants with Bismuth-Lead Coolant. Atomnaya Energiya. 1996, v. 81, no. 5, pp. 340-347 (in Russian).
9. Mitenkov F.M. Reflections on the Experience. Moscow. Izdatelstvo po Atomnoy Tekhnike Publ., 2004, 400 p. (in Russian).
10. Poplavsky V.M. State and Development Trends of Fast Reactor Technology. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no. 1, pp. 5-15 (in Russian).
11. Weeks K.E., Block F.E. Thermodynamic Properties of 65 Elements, their Oxides, Halides, Carbides and Nitrides. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1965, 240 p. (in Russian).
12. Turovtseva Z.M., Kunin L.L. Analysis of Gases in Metals. Moscow-Leningrad. Izdatelstvo AN SSSR Publ., 1959, 390 p. (in Russian)
13. Gromov B.F., Shmatko B.A. Physicochemical Properties of Lead-Bismuth Melts. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1996, no. 4, pp. 35-41 (in Russian).
14. Dragunov Yu.G., Lemekhov V.V., Moiseev A.V., Smirnov V.S. Lead-Cooled Fast Neutron Reactor (BREST). Problemy Mashinostroeniya i Avtomatizatsii. 2015, no. 3, pp. 97-103 (in Russian).
15. Martynov P.N., Gulevich A.V., Orlov Yu.I., Gulevsky V.A. Water and Hydrogen in Heavy Liquid Metal Coolant Technology. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2005, v. 47, iss. 1-4, pp. 604-615.
16. Askhadullin R.Sh., Ivanov K.D., Shelemetyev V.M., Sadovnichy R.P. Assessment of the Intensity of Oxidation Processes of Structural Steels of the Primary Circuit of Nuclear Power Plants with Heavy Heat Carriers. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no. 4, pp. 121-128 (in Russian).
17. Salaev S.V., Askhadullin R.Sh., Legkikh A.Yu. Results of Research on Expanding the Methodological Capabilities of Determining the Physicochemical State of Liquid Metal Coolants based on Lead. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 1, pp. 98-106; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.10 (in Russian).
18. Belousova N.V., Denisov V.M., Istomin S. A. Interaction of Liquid Metals and Alloys with Oxygen. Ekaterinburg. Institut Metallurgii UrO RAN Publ., 2004, 288 p. ISSN 5-7691-1531-9 (in Russian).
19. Ivanov I.I., Shelemetyev V.M., Ulyanov V.V., Teplyakov Yu.A. Kinetics of the Reduction of Orthorhombic and Tetragonal Lead Oxides to Lead with Hydrogen. Kinetika i Kataliz. 2015, no 3, pp. 1-5 (in Russian).
20. Cercignani C. Numerical Study of the Strong Evaporation of a Binary Mixture. Fluid Dynamics Research. 1991, v. 8, iss. 5-6, pp. 175-187.
21. Theoretical Foundations of Refrigeration Engineering. Part 2. Heat and Mass Transfer. Moscow. Kolos Publ., 1994, 288 p. (in Russian).