+++

categories="article"
date="2021-06-15T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2021-02"
issue_name="2021 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/02/13.pdf"
first_page="145"
last_page="155"
udc="621.039, 53.05, 53.043"
title="Simulation of a Thermonuclear Plant with an Internal Catalytic Cycle"
original_title="Моделирование термоядерной установки с внутренним каталитическим циклом"
authors=["StolbovSN", "DrobyshevskyYuV", "AnfimovIM", "VarlachevVA", "KobelevaSP", "NekrasovSA", "KorzhenevskyAV"]
tags=["thermonuclear reactor", "catalytically closed internal fuel cycle", "control of thermal neutron flux", "selective separation effect of thermal neutrons", "radial magnetic dynamic (RMHD) generator"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.13"

+++

The article presents the results of field experimental studies, which have confirmed the possibility of effective control of thermal neutron fluxes, and their quantitative assessment is obtained. The authors have developed a theoretical model that makes it possible to simulate the processes and quantitatively evaluate the effects. The efficiency of the design of an anisotropic concentrator of thermal neutrons from a diffuse neutron field with elliptical channels made in the form of packages of plates of profiled graphite and aluminum was experimentally confirmed. The experiments were carried out in the GEC-4 channel at the IRT-T NI TPU reactor. The integral neutron flux was (2.3–3.02)1017 cm–2. The neutron flux was detected by the change in the electrical resistivity of monocrystalline silicon wafers. The effect of concentration of thermal neutrons was registered both on a group of graphite neutron mirrors and on a set of aluminum thin-walled elliptical mirrors.

These results are the basis for creating a new scheme of thermonuclear reactors with a catalytically supported approach to the implementation of thermonuclear energy. The fuel mixture is heated and burned out when helium-3 interacts with thermal neutrons, while the fuel cycle of a reactor closed in tritium, helium-3 and neutrons is being formed. A new scheme of thermonuclear reactors with a catalytically supported approach to the implementation of thermonuclear energy, internal neutron heating of the plasma and its catalytically stabilized composition is proposed. Preliminary numerical simulation made it possible to conclude that a thermonuclear fusion reactor with an internal catalytic cycle is quite feasible, while it can be quite compact, and its implementation does not require significant financial costs.

### References

1. Semenov I. Energy of the Future: Controlled Thermonuclear Fusion. What is the ITER Fusion Reactor and why is its Creation so Important? Materials of the lecture given on November 27, 2008 at the Lebedev Physical Institute. Available at: https://elementy.ru/video/114/Energetika_budushchego_upravlyaemyy_termoyadernyy_sintez_Chto_takoe_termoyadernyy_reaktor_ITER_i_pochemu_tak_vazhno_ego_sozdanie (accessed Sep. 25, 2020) (in Russian).
2. Strelkov V.S. Thermonuclear Power Engineering: 60 Years of Research. What’s next? VANT. Ser. Termoyadernyj Sintez. 2016, v. 39, iss. 1, pp. 5-14 (in Russian).
3. Golovin I.N. Low Radioactive Controlled Thermonuclear Fusion (Reactors with D43 He). Preprint IAE-4885/8. Moscow. IAE Publ., 1989, 47 p. (in Russian).
4. Mukhin K.M. Experimental Nuclear Physics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 616 p. (in Russian).
5. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov. S.N. Method of Controlled Thermonuclear Fusion and Controlled Thermonuclear Reactor for its Implementation. Patent RU No. 2056649, 1992 (in Russian).
6. Stolbov S.N., Drobyshevsky Yu.V. Thermonuclear Reactor with an Internal Catalytic Cycle. SCI4ARTICLE.RU, 2014, no. 16. Available at: https://sci-article.ru/stat.php?i=1418333672 (accessed Sep. 25, 2020) (in Russian).
7. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. A Device for Forming a Directed Neutron Flux. Patent RU No. 1821818, 1990 (in Russian).
8. Gurevich I.I., Protasov V.P. Neutron Physics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1997, 416 p. (in Russian).
9. Vlasov N.A. Neutrons. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1971, 551 p. (in Russian).
10. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Kobeleva S.P., Nekrasov S.A., Stolbov S.N. Experimental Confirmation of Selective Neutron Separation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 3, pp. 148-159; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.15 (in Russian).
11. Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Drobyshevsky Yu.V. et al. Registration of the Effect of Selective Separation of Thermal Neutrons. VANT. Ser. Fizika Radiatsionnogo Vozdejstviya na Electronnuyu Apparaturu. 2018, iss. 1, pp. 24-30 (in Russian).
12. Anfimov I.M., Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. et al. Registration of the Effect of Selective Separation of Thermal Neutrons. Izvestiya Instituta Enginernoy Fiziki. 2018, v. 3, no. 49, pp. 21-26 (in Russian).
13. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Kobeleva S.P., Nekrasov S.A., Stolbov S.N. Anisotropic Structures for the Concentration of Thermal Neutron Fluxes. Pribory i Tekhnika Eksperimenta. 2020, no. 1, pp. 1-6 (in Russian).
14. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Kobeleva S.P., Nekrasov S.A., Stolbov S.N. Experimental Confirmation of a New Method for Selective Neutron Separation. Nuclear Energy and Technology. 2020, no. 6 (4), pp. 235-241; DOI: https://doi.org/10.3897/nucet.6.60294 .
15. Varlachev V.A., Zenkov A.G., Solodovnikov E.S. Features of Neutron-Transmutation Silicon Doping at Research Reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 1998, no. 4, pp. 210-215 (in Russian).
16. Baker V.E., Cox P.A., Westine P.S., Kulesz D.D., Strekhlov R.A. Explosive Phenomena, Assessment and Consequences. Eds. Ya.B. Zel’dovich and B.E. Gelfand. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1986, 319 p. (in Russian).
17. Kapitsa P.L. Free Laser Cord in a High-Frequency Field at High Pressure. ZhETF. 1969, v. 57, p. 1801 (in Russian).
18. Guseinov T.Kh., Rasulov E.A., Babaeva R.F. Double Electric Layer of Helium Discharge in Modulation Mode. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 2019, no. 9, pp. 132-138; DOI: https://doi.org/10.17223/00213411/62/9/132 (in Russian).
19. Cobine James D., Harris Lawson P. Magnetohidrodynamic Generator Configuration. Patent US No. 3149247, 1964.
20. Kokorev L.S., Kharitonov V.V. Direct Energy Conversion and Thermonuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1980, 216 p. (in Russian).
21. Subbotin M.L., Kurbatov D.K., Filimonova E.A. A Review of the State of Research on Demonstration Fusion Reactors in the World. VANT. Ser. Termoyadernyj Sintez. 2010, iss. 3, pp. 55-74 (in Russian).