+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="18"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Principles of Construction and Development of an Automatic Protection System for Steam Generators of Fast Reactors"
original_title="Принципы построения и развитие системы автоматической защиты парогенераторов быстрых натриевых реакторов"
authors=["BorisovVV", "KamaevАА", "MyazdrikovaOI", "MikhinSA", "PakhomovIA", "PerevoznikovSV"]
tags=["sodium coolant", "sodium-water steam generator", "steam generator protection system", "water leaks into sodium", "inter-circuit leakeness", "control system for «small» leaks", "«large» leak"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.01"

+++

On the example of domestic fast reactors BN-350, BN-600, BN-800, the evolution of technical solutions for the automatic protection system of sodium-water steam generators (SAZ SG) is analyzed. The structural diagrams and main characteristics of the SAZ SG equipment of listed reactors are presented. The effectiveness of SAZ in conditions of real leaks in steam generators of BN reactors is analyzed. The issues of development and creation of SAZ SG of designed BN-1200 INU MBIR are considered.

### References

1. Poplavskii V.M. Fast reactors. Status and prospects. – Atomic energy, 2004, v. 96, iss. 5, pp. 301— 307. DOI:10.1023/B:ATEN.0000038094.56394.e6
2. Poplavskii V.M., Kozlov F.A. Safety of sodium-water steam generators. ENERGOATOMIZDAT. Moscow, 1990. – P. 144. ISBN 5-283-03775-4 (In Russian).
3. Kuznetsov I.A., Poplavskii V.M. Safety of nuclear power plants with fast neutron reactors. IzdAT, Moscow, 2012. – P. 632. ISBN 978-5-86656-257-2 (In Russian).
4. Bakluschin R.P. Operating modes of nuclear power plants. Publishing House MEI, 2012. – P. 531. ISBN 978-5-383-00641-2 (In Russian).
5. Bakluschin R.P., Bolgarin V.I., Levitin V.L., Poplavskii V.M. Modernization and experience the BN-350 steam generator emergency protection system. / Collection of reports. Seminar of COMECON member countries. «Experience in the development and operation of fast reactor steam generators». Dimitrovgrad, 1982. – P. 226 (In Russian).
6. Antufyev O.N., Artemikhin V.G., Bakluschin R.P., Bolgarin V.I., Vasilenko K.T., Poplavskii V.M., Samarkin A.A. Operational experience of BN-350 steam generators./ Collection of reports. Seminar of COMECON member countries. «Experience in the development and operation of fast reactor steam generators». Dimitrovgrad, 1982. – P. 82 (In Russian).
7. NPP steam generators: textbook / Tashlykov O.L., Beltyukov A.I. – Ekaterinburg : Ural Univers. Publishing House, 2019. P. 304. ISBN 978-5-7996-2675-4 (In Russian).
8. Artemikhin V.G. Analysis of the operation of BN-350 steam generator control and protection systems when water leaks into sodium. / Report on the Soviet-French seminar «Technological scheme, design and operational experience of control and emergency protection systemsof sodium-water steam generators». Obninsk, 1979 (In Russian).
9. Trojanov M.F., Rinejsky A.A. Status of work on fast reactors in RF / 25th annual meeting of International Working Group on fast reactors of IAEA, Vienna, 27-30 April 1992.
10. Conceptual designs of advanced fast reactors. IAEA-TECDOC-907. IAEA. October 1996. P. 248.
11. TsikanovV.A., Buy V.F., Kondratyev V.I., Nechaev B.N., Nikolsky R.V., PrivalovYu.V., Sroelov V.S., Chernobrovkin Yu.V., Dubshek F., Tomesh V., Matal O., Shrutek J., Kugler V. Results of resourse tests and experimental studies of large-scale models of steam generator at the installation BOR-60. / Report on Seminar of COMECON member countries. «Experience in the development and operation of fast reactor steam generators». Dimitrovgrad, 1982.
12. Fast reactor database/ IAEA – TECDOC – 866, IAEA. VIENNA. February 1996.
13. Vasyaev A.V., Gulevich A.V., Dyagilev A.M., Egorov C.V., Kamaev A.A., Kerekesha A.V., Marova E.V., Peregudov A.A., Troyanov V.M., Shepelev S.F., Yashkin A.V. NPP with reactor BN-1200M. Design solutions, transition to their practical implementation. VANT. Ser.: Nuclear reactor constants. 2022, iss. 4, pp. 75-85. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/images/pdf/2022/issue2022-4-75-85.pdf (in Russian).
14. Ershov V.N., Shepelev S.F. Power unit with reactor BN-1200M. / Collection of reports. The industry conference «Closure of the fuel cycle of nuclear power based on fast neutron reactors». Tomsk, 11–12 October 2018, pp. 168-176 (in Russian).