+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/03.pdf"
first_page="31"
last_page="44"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Evaluation of Neutron	Physical Characteristics of the Conceptual Fast Neutron Reactor Cooled by Carbon Dioxide"
original_title="сследование нейтронно-физических характеристик концептуального ядерного реактора на быстрых нейтронах, охлаждаемого углекислым газом"
authors=["SemishinVV"]
tags=["neutron physics calculation", "Desna", "SAPPHIRE", "fast neutrons", "fuel reuse", "remix", "two-component nuclear power", "plutonium"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.03"

+++

As part of the study of the neutron-physical characteristics of the concept of a gas-cooled fast neutron nuclear reactor with reduced energy density of fuel in the core and reduced coolant pressure in the primary circuit, an assessment of the possibility of functioning and nuclear safety when using various types of fuel was carried out. The possibility of reuse in this reactor of manufactured nuclear fuel from thermal reactors of the VVER-1000 type, which form the basis of the reactor fleet of the Russian Federation, and the involvement of plutonium produced at thermal reactors in the fuel cycle of the fast neutron nuclear reactor under consideration, is shown. Studies of fuel campaigns were carried out for several types of fuel: fresh enriched uranium dioxide; REMIX fuel, enriched with uranium-235; dump uranium, enriched with a mixture of plutonium isotopes extracted from SNF reactors of the VVER type.

### References

1. Muravyov E.V. Necessity of nuclear fuel cycle closure. Atomic Energy. 2012, v. 111, iss. 6, pp. 404-412; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-012-9511-z
2. Darilek, P., & Zajac, R. ALLEGRO – introduction to GFR. //Proc. of the twenty-first symposium of atomic energy research on WWER physics and reactor safety, (p. 700). Hungary: Kiadja and KFKI Atomenergia Kutatointezet., 2011.
3. Hatala, Branislav. Gas Cooled Fast Reactor. 13th GIF-IAEA Interface Meeting Presentations, (p. v). International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 2019.
4. Kavun O.Yu, Lifshits A.M., Semishin V.V. The concept of a gas-cooled internally safe fast neutron nuclear reactor. // Automation and IT in power engineering, 2021, v. 141, iss. 4, pp. 12-23. (in Russian).
5. Semishin V.V., Kavun O.Yu. Computational study of the thermal-hydraulic characteristics of a fast neutron nuclear reactor cooled by CO2  – In Proc. of Thermophysics of new generation reactors Russia, 2022 – 168 с. ISBN 978-5-907108-39-4 (in Russian).
6. Tebin V.V., Obuhov V.V, Sergeev V.K., Ivanov A.S. The project of the SAPPHIRE software package for solving the problems of calculating the reactor cell // VANT, s. Nuclear reactor physics, 1985, v.111, iss. 4, pp. 68–71 (in Russian).
7. SAPFIR_95.1 with cross-section library BNAB-78/С-95. Passport №205 15.12.05.
8. Kavun O.Yu. The method of modeling the dynamics of the NPP power unit implemented in the RADUGA-EU software package // VANT, s. Nuclear reactor physics, 1999, iss. 2, с.17-39 (In Russian).
9. Kavun O.Yu , Kavun V.O., Semishin V.V. Development of a multi-group physical model for modeling the dynamics of a BN-type reactor core based on Rainbow-TPP SP// Proc. Of the 30-th Symp. Of neutron-physical problems of nuclear power engineering, 2019 (In Russian).
https://www.ippe.ru/images/science_info/conference/neutron2019/presentation/section6/Kavun-multi-group-physical-model-dynamics-active-zone.pdf?ysclid=lle0itt3j3500712523 (date of access 16.02.2023).
10. Semishin V.V., Kavun O.Yu. Investigation of the possibility of closing the fuel cycle for the VVER-1000 reactor // Proc. Of the 30-th Symp. Of neutron-physical problems of nuclear power engineering, 2019, 108 p. (In Russian).
11. Babushkin S.V., Vasil’ev B.A., Vasyaev A.V., Vorontsov V.E., Dushev S.A., Zverev D.L., Kiryushin A.I., Marova E.V., Sedakov V.Yu., Staroverov A. I., Timofeev A.V., Shepelev S.F. Reactor Installations with Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactors for Two-Component Nuclear Energy. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 129, iss. 1, pp. 8-17; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00705-y.
12. Klinov D.A., Gulevich A.V., Eliseev V.A, Bur’evskii I. V., Gurskaya O. S., Troyanov V. M., Meriot C., Lemasson D., Velardo H., Camarcat N. Fast Reactor Aided Adjustment of Plutonium Isotope Composition. Atomic Energy. 2021, v. 129, iss. 5, pp. 270-277; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00747-2.
13. Gulevich A.V., Eliseev V.A., Klinov D.A., Korobeinikova L.V., Kryachko M. V., Pershukov V.A., Troyanov V.M. Possibility of Burning Americium in Fast Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 128, iss. 2, pp. 88–94; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00656-w
14. Poplavski V.M., Matveev V.I., Rabotnov N.S. Closure of the nuclear fuel cycle: Actinide balance and safety. Atomic Energy. 1996, v. 81, iss. 2, pp. 580-585; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02415660.
15. Kashcheev V.A., Shadrin A.Y., Rykovanov G.N., Dyrda N.D., Makeeva I.R., Khmel’nitskii D.V., Alekseev P.N. Radwaste Volume from VVER-1000 Spent Fuel Reprocessing and Fractionation Variants. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 127, iss. 2, pp. 93-98; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00591-5.