+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/06.pdf"
first_page="74"
last_page="84"
udc="614.876:621.039.586"
title="Peculiarities of the exposure dose formation on the population in the most affected regions of russia after the chernobyl NPP accident"
original_title="Особенности формирования дозовых нагрузок на население наиболее пострадавших после Чернобыльской аварии районов России"
authors=["PanovAV", "KomarovaLN", "LyapunovaER", "MelnikovaAA"]
tags=["Chernobyl accident", "radioactive contamination", "137Cs", "specific activity of radionuclides in foodstuffs", "external exposure dose", "internal exposure dose"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.06"

+++

The paper presents an analysis of the current radiation situation in the settlements of the Russian Federation located on the most radioactively contaminated territory after the Chernobyl accident. The assessment of 137Cs content in local agricultural (milk, beef, pork, potatoes), natural (mushrooms) foodstuffs, doses of external, and internal irradiation of residents was carried out. 37 years after the Chernobyl NPP accident, 72 settlements with a total number of residents of 63869 remain in the zone of radioactive contamination whose average effective radiation doses exceed 1 mSv/year. All these settlements are located in five southwestern districts of the Bryansk region and are rural except for the Novozybkov. In the private sector of settlements, potatoes and pork fully comply with radiological standards for the content of 137Cs. In milk, the content of the radionuclide can exceed the standards up to 3, in beef up to 5, in mushrooms up to 8–17 times. Over the past 30 years, the number of settlements exceeding the legally established standard for the total exposure dose to the population (1 mSv/year) has decreased by 7.5 times. Due to the decrease in the levels of 137Cs contamination of local foodstuffs and the volume of their consumption, the role of internal exposure dose has been decreasing in recent years. It was noted that in addition to a comprehensive assessment of the radiation situation in settlements, agricultural and natural ecosystems, when planning the rehabilitation of settlements with average annual radiation doses of residents above 1 mSv, it is important to take into account the current diets of residents and the real demographic situation in the territories affected by the Chernobyl accident.

### References

1. IAEA. International Atomic Energy Agency. Environmental consequences of the Chernobyl accident and their remediation: twenty years of experience. Report of the UN Chernobyl Forum Expert Group «Environment» (EGE). Vienna, IAEA. 2006. 166 p. Available at: https://www.iaea.org/publications/7382/environmental-consequences-of-the-chernobyl-accident-and-their-remediation-twenty-years-of-experience (accessed Jan. 29, 2023).
2. Atlas of modern and predictive aspects of the consequences of the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in the affected territories of Russia and Belarus (ASPA Russia–Belarus). Eds.: Yu.A. Izrael, I.M. Bogdevich. Moscow, Minsk. 2009. 140 p. Available at: https://chernobyl.mchs.gov.by/informatsionnyy-tsentr/atlas-sovremennykh-i-prognoznykh-posledstviy-katastrofy-na-chaes/ (accessed Jan. 29, 2023) (in Russian).
3. Vlasov O.K., Bruk G.Ya., Zvonova I.A., Shchukina N.V. Estimating uncertainties in external and internal radiation doses in people resided in contaminated regions of Russia after the Chernobyl accident with the use of instrumental data. Radiation and Risk. 2022, no. 31 (4), pp. 34-52; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2022-31-4-34-52 (in Russian).
4. Order of the Russian Federation Government 08.10.2015 No 1074 “On approval of the list of settlements within the boundaries of radioactive pollution zones caused by Chernobyl NPP accident“, M, 2015.
5. Bruk G.Y., Romanovich I.K., Bazyukin A.B., Bratilova A.A., Vlasov A.Yu., Gromov A.V., Zhesko T.V., Kaduka M.V., Kravtsova O.S., Saprykin K.A., Stepanov V.S., Titov N.V., Yakovlev V.A. The average annual effective doses for the population of the settlements of the Russian Federation attributed to zones of radioactive contamination due to the Chernobyl accident (for the zonation purposes). Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2017, no. 10 (4), pp. 73-78; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2017-10-4-73-78 (in Russian).
6. Romanovich I.K., Bruk G.Y., Barkovskiy A.N., Bratilova A.A., Gromov A.V., Kaduka M.V. Substantiation of the concept of transfer to conditions of normal population activity of the settlements considered to be zones of radioactive contamination after the Chernobyl NPP accident. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2016, no. 9 (1), pp. 6-18 (in Russian).
7. Panov A.V. Returning radioactively contaminated territories to normal life: current problems and ways for solution (35 years after the Chernobyl NPP accident). Medico-Biological and Socio-Psychological Issues of Safety in Emergency Situations. 2021, no. 1, pp. 5-13; DOI: https://doi.org/10.25016/2541-7487-2021-0-1-05-13 (in Russian).
8. Travnikova I.G., Bruk G.Y., Shutov V.N., Bazjukin A.B. Contribution of different foodstuffs tо the internal exposure of the rural inhabitants of the Bryansk region in Russia after the Chernobyl accident. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2013, no. 6 (2), pp. 11-20 (in Russian).
9. Travnikova I.G. The dynamics of food rations of Bryansk region population living in the territories contaminated after the Chernobyl accident. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2014, no. 7 (3), pp. 26-32 (in Russian).
10. Official order of Bryansk Statistic Department No. TB-T35-09/773-TS dated February 22, 2023 “On the provision of statistical information”. (in Russian).
11. Estimation of average annual effective doses of critical groups of residents of settlements of the Russian Federation exposed to radioactive contamination as a result of the Chernobyl accident. MU 2.6.1.2003-05. Moscow, 2005. 20 p. (in Russian).
12. Data on radioactive contamination of the territory of settlements of the Russian Federation with 137 Cs, 90 Sr, 239+240 Pu. Eds.: S.M. Vakulovsky. Obninsk. 2022. 233 p. Available at: https://www.rpatyphoon.ru/products/pollution-media.php (accessed Jan. 29, 2023) (in Russian).
13. Panov A.V., Sanzharova N.I., Shubina O.A., Gordienko E.V., Titov I.E. Modern situation and the prognosis of the contamination by 137 Cs of the farm lands of Bryansk, Kaluga, Orel and Tula regions, affected by the Chernobyl NPP accident. Radiation and Risk. 2017, no. 26 (3), pp. 66-74; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2017-26-3-66-74 (in Russian).
14. Panov A.V., Prudnikov P.V., Titov I.E., Krechetnikov V.V., Ratnikov A.N., Shubina O.A. Radioecological assessment of the agricultural lands and products in south-west districts of the Bryansk region contaminated by radionuclides as the result of the Chernobyl NPP accident. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2019, no. 12 (1), pp. 25-35; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2019-12-1-25-35 (in Russian).
15. Marchenko T.A., Radin A.I., Razdaivodin A.N. Retrospective and current state of forest territories of the border areas of the Bryansk region exposed to radioactive contamination. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2020, no. 13 (2), pp. 6-18; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2020-13-2-6-18 (in Russian).
16. Titov I.E., Krechetnikov V.V., Mikailova R.A., Panov A.V. Geoinformation decision support system for remediation of the 137 Cs contaminated agricultural lands after the Chernobyl NPP accident. Nucl. Eng. Technol. 2022, no. 54 (6), pp. 2244-2252. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2021.12.017.
17. Gromov A.V. Assessment of current internal exposure doses due to the accident at Chernobyl NPP for the citizens of some Bryansk region settlements. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2010, no. 3 (3), pp. 28-35 (in Russian).
18. Bratilova A.A., Bruk G.Y. Influence of the consumption of different foodstuffs on the internal exposure dose formation in the adult population of the Russian Federation after the accident at the Chernobyl NPP. Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2018, no. 11 (2), pp. 53-59; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2018-11-2-53-59 (in Russian).
19. Belous N.M., Prudnikov P.V., Shcheglov A.M., Smolskiy E.V., Belous I.N., Silayev A.L. Estimating risk of radiocesium presence at levels exceeded the permissible amount of the radionuclide in forage and milk from the south-west part of Bryansk region long after the Chernobyl accident. Radiation and Risk. 2019, no. 28 (3), pp. 36-46; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2019-28-3-36-46 (in Russian).
20. Panov A.V., Fesenko S.V., Alexakhin R.M., Pasternak A.D., Prudnikov P.V. Radiological assessment of protective countermeasures in the private sector of rural settlements in the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident area. Radiatsionnaia biologiia, radioecologiia. 2007, no. 47 (2), pp. 224-230 (in Russian).