+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/07.pdf"
first_page="85"
last_page="93"
udc="504.064.36:574"
title="Radiation Risk Assessment For The Population From C-14 Emissions Of The World’s First NPP and Smolensk NPP"
original_title="Оценка радиационного риска для населения от выбросов C-14 первой в мире АЭС и смоленской АЭС"
authors=["SynzynysBI", "NguyenThiKimPhung", "MomotOA", "LavrentyevaGV"]
tags=["carbon-14", "nuclear power plant", "internal radiation dose", "radiation risk", "inhalation", "food consumption"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.07"

+++

The results of the internal radiation dose calculations for the population and the assessment of the radiation risk from radioactive carbon C-14 during the normal operation of the World’s First Nuclear Power Plant in Obninsk and Smolensk NPP are presented. Calculations were carried out using two methods, taking into account the inhalation and oral intake of C-14 with food into the human body. Radiation doses are 5.69·10–9 Sv/year and 5.95·10–9 Sv/year (for Obninsk NPP), 3.77·10–7 Sv/year and 3.96·10–7 Sv/year (for Smolensk NPP), which is orders of magnitude less than the established minimum significant dose (10 μSv). The assessed levels of radiation risk for the population does not exceed risk established by NRB-99/2009 (1·10–5). It was found that the main contribution to the formation of the dose and risk of internal radiation of the population from C-14 radiation, released by the respective NPP, is the incorporation of radionuclide with locally produced food products, which is confirmed by the results of calculations using two methods, taking into account the influence of two nuclear power plants.

### References


1. Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards. IAEA safety standards series No. GSR Part 3. – Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency, 2014. – 471 c.
2. SanPiN 2.6.1.2523-09 Radiation Safety Standards (NRB-99/2009). Sanitary-Epidemiologic Rules and Standards. Moscow. The Federal Center for Hygiene and Epidemiology of Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2009, 100 p. (in Russian).
3. SP 2.6.1.2612-10. Basic Sanitary Rules for Ensuring Radiation Safety (OSPORB-99/2010). The Federal Center for Hygiene and Epidemiology of Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2009, 83 p. (in Russian).
4. Germansky A.M. Radioactive Carbon near Nuclear Facilities, Habitat and Human Health. Green World Website. Available at: http://www.greenworld.org.ru/?q=rao1679 (accessed Feb. 22, 2023) (in Russian).
5. Kryshev A.I., Kryshev I.I., Vasyanovich M.E., Ekidin A.A., Kapustin I.A., Murashova E.L. Population Irradiation Dose Assessment for 14C Emissions from NPP with RBMK-1000 and EGP-2 Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2020, v.128, pp. 53-59;  DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00650-2.
6. Rublevskii V.P., Yatsenko V.N. Features of Radiological and Biological Actions of 14C on Living Organisms and the Danger of its Accumulation in the Earth’s Biosphere. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 125, pp. 345-350; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00492-7.
7. The World’s First NPP. Available at: https://www.ippe.ru/history/1aes (accessed May 31, 2023). (in Russian).
8. Smolensk NPP Website. Available at: https://rosenergoatom.ru/stations_projects/sayt-smolenskoy-aes/# (accessed May 31, 2023). (in Russian).
9. Rublevskii V.P., Yatsenko V.N. NPP Nuclear Power Reactors As 14C sources. Atomic Energy, 2016, v. 121, №2, pp. 148-154.
10. Garnier-Laplace J. and Roussel-Debet S. Carbon-14 and the Environment. Radionuclide Fact Sheet. IRSN. Institut de Radioprotection et de Surete Nucleaire. France, 2010, 19 p.
11. Initial Radiological Assessment Methodology. Part 2. Methods and Input Data. Science Report: SC030162/SR2. Bristol, Environment Agency, 2006, 236 p.
12. MU 2.6.5.010-2016. 2.6.5. Nuclear Power and Industry. Justification of the Limits and Operating Conditions of Sanitary Protection Zones and Observation Zones of Radiation Facilities. Guidelines (Approved by the FMBA of Russia Apr. 22, 2016). Moscow. FMBA of Russia Publ., 2016 (in Russian).
13. Generic Models for Use in Assessing the Impact of Discharges of Radioactive Substances to the Environment. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001, 216 p.
14. R 52.18.787-2013. Methodology for Assessing Radiation Risks Based on Radiation Monitoring Data. Obninsk. VNIIGMI – MTsD Publ., 2014, 116 p. (in Russian).
15. SanPiN 2.6.1.24-03. 2.6.1. Ionizing Radiation, Radiation Safety. Sanitary Rules for the Design and Operation of Nuclear Power Plants (SP AS-03). Sanitary-Epidemiologic Rules and Standards. Moscow. The Federal Center for Hygiene and Epidemiology of Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2003 (in Russian).