+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/08.pdf"
first_page="94"
last_page="105"
udc="621.039.54, 621.039.516.22"
title="Analytical Dependence of the Burnup on the Enrichment of Prospective Fuel and the Parameters of the Fuel Campaign of Reactors"
original_title="Аналитическая зависимость глубины выгорания от обогащения перспективного топлива и параметров топливной кампании реакторов"
authors=["SemenovEV", "KharitonovVV"]
tags=["NPP", "nuclear fuel burnup", "enrichment", "frequency of overload of fuel assemblies", "reactor campaign", "fuel share of the cost of electricity"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.08"

+++

The paper is devoted to the definition of an analytical expression for estimating the burnout depth of nuclear fuel depending on its enrichment level, the periodicity of fuel overloads, heat intensity and the duration of the time period between fuel overloads (reactor campaign) in a wide range of changes in key parameters for different types of thermal neutron reactors. The analytical expressions obtained in the work for the burnout depth are compared with numerous neutron physics calculations and experimental data from different authors for uranium fuel enrichment up to 9%. Calculations of the fuel share of the cost of electricity of nuclear power plants with PWR type reactors have been performed and its sensitivity to changes in the depth of burnout and enrichment of fuel, the frequency of its overloads, as well as to market prices for natural uranium, conversion, enrichment, fabrication of fuel assemblies and SNF handling has been determined.

### References

1. Gorokhov A.K., Dragunov Yu.G., Lunin G.L., Novikov A.N., Cofin V.I., Anan’ev Ju.A. Validation of the Neutron-Physical and Radiation Parts of VVER Designs. Moscow. IKTs Akademkniga Publ., 2004, 496 p. (in Russian).
2. Very High Burn-ups in Light Water Reactors. OECD/NEA, 2006, 138 р. ISBN 92-64-02303-8.
3. Categorization of used nuclear fuel inventory in support of a comprehensive national nuclear fuel cycle strategy. Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), 2012, 98 р.
4. Impact of High Burnup Uranium Oxide and Mixed Uranium–Plutonium Oxide Water Reactor Fuel on Spent Fuel Management. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series. No. NF-T-3.8. IAEA, 2011, 99 р.
5. Jatuff F.E. High Burnup Fuel Technical and Economical Lessons Learned at SWISS Nuclear Power Plants. Proc. of a Technical Meeting Held in Buenos Aires, 26–29 November 2013. Vienna. IAEA Publ., 2016, pp. 125–138.
6. Semchenkov Yu., Pavlovich A., Chibinyaev A. Proximity to the scenario. Prospects for evolutionary development of VVER fuel. Atomnaya energetika Rossii. 2011, no. 10, pp. 25–29 (in Russian).
7. Nuclear fuels. A Nuclear Energy Division Monograph. Commissariat а l’energie atomique, Paris, 2009. – 150 p.
8. Zhiwen Xu. Design Strategies for Optimizing High Burnup Fuel in Pressurized Water Reactors / Ph.D. dissertation // Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003. – 305 p.
9. Future of Nuclear Power. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study. – Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003. – 180 p. ISBN 0-615-12420-8.
10. Burns J.R., Hernandez R., Terrani R.A., Nelson A.T., Brown N.B. Reactor and fuel cycle performance of light water reactor fuel with 235U enrichments above 5%. // Annals of Nuclear Energy. – 2020, – no. 142, pp. 1-11. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107423 .
11. State-of-the-Art Report on Light Water Reactor Accident-Tolerant Fuels. –OECD/NEA, 2018. – 372 p.
12. Ian Younker, Massimiliano Fratoni. Neutronic and Economic Evaluation of Accident Tolerant Fuel Concepts for Light Water Reactor // Advances in Nuclear Fuel Management V (ANFM 2015). – Topical Meeting ANFM. – 2015, – pp. 1– 13.
13. Semenov E.V., Kharitonov V.V. Microeconomics of improving the safety of nuclear power plants based on using of accident tolerant fuel. Mikroekonomika. 2021, no. 5, pp. 49–62 (in Russian).
14. Kuryndin A.V., Kirkin A.M., Karimov A. Z., Makovsky S. V. On approaches to regulating the safety of the use of tolerant nuclear fuel. Nuclear and radiation safety. 2021, no. 4 (102), pp. 13-23 (in Russian).
15. Bin Zhang, Pengcheng Gao, Tao Xu, Miao Gui, Jianqiang Shan. Performance evaluation of Accident Tolerant Fuel under station blackout accident in PWR nuclear power plant by improved ISAA code // Nuclear Engineering and Technology. – 2022. – v.54, – pp. 2475-2490. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2022.01.024 .
16. Glushkov E.S., Demin V.E., Ponomarev!Stepnoj N.N, Hrulev А.А. Heat generation in a nuclear reactor. Energoatomizdat Publ, 1985, 160 p. (in Russian).
17. RBMK channel nuclear reactor. Moscow. GUP NIKIET Publ., 2006, 632 p. (in Russian)
18. Seung-Woo, Lee, Dong-Keun Cho, Jong-Won Choi, Heui-Joon Choi. Burnup and Source Term Analyses for a CANDU Spent Fuel. Transactions of the Korean Nuclear Society Autumn Meeting. 2007, pp. 183 – 184.
19. Kharitonov V.V., Kosolapova N.V., Uljanin Yu.A. Analytical Forecasting of Investment Performance in Multi-Unit Power Plants. Bulletin of the NRNU MEPhI, 2018, v. 7, no. 6, pp. 545–562 (in Russian).
20. Annual reports of JSC Atomenergoprom for 2011–2021. Available at: https://atomenergoprom.ru/ru/invest/annual/ (accessed Apr.16, 2023) (in Russian).