+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/09.pdf"
first_page="106"
last_page="117"
udc="541.13+11"
title="Computer Simulation of Thermal Processes Involving Sr and Ca Radionuclides in the Process of Heating Radioactive Graphite in an Air Atmosphere"
original_title="Компьютерное моделирование термических процессов с участием радионуклидов Sr, Ca при нагревании радиоактивного графита в атмосфере воздуха"
authors=["BarbinNM," TitovSA", "TerentievDI", "KobelevAM"]
tags=["thermodynamic simulation", "thermal processes", "equilibrium constant", "radionuclides", "radioactive graphite", "heating", "air atmosphere"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.09"

+++

The paper presents the results from a thermodynamic analysis of the behavior of Sr and Ca radionuclides in the process of heating radioactive graphite in an air atmosphere. The TERRA software package was used for the thermodynamic analysis in a temperature range of 300 to 3600 K to determine the possible composition of the ionized, gaseous and condensed phases. It has been found that strontium is in the form of condensed SrCl2(k) and gaseous SrCl2 in a temperature range of 300 to 1600 K, and in the form of gaseous SrCl2, SrO, SrCl and Sr and ionized SrCl+, Sr+ and SrO+ when the temperature is increased from 1600 to 3600 K. Calcium is in the form of condensed CaCl2(k), CaUO4(k), CaO(k) and gaseous CaCl2 in the temperature interval between 300 and 2100 K, and in the form of gaseous Ca, CaCl and CaO and ionized Ca+, CaO+ and CaCl+ when the temperature is increased from 2100 to 3600 K. The paper determines the key reactions within individual phases and among condensed, gaseous and ionized phases. The equilibrium constants of their reactions have been calculated. Based on the results obtained, dependence plots are presented for the Sr and Ca radionuclide distribution by phases.

### References

1. Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation: official website. Electronic resource: http://www.rosatom.ru / (accessed 10.09.2022).
2. The IAEA database on Nuclear Power Reactors. Electronic resource: https://pris.iaea.org/pris / (accessed 16.02.2021).
3. Velkin V.I. Nuclear power engineering of the world. Status and prospects. Study guide. – Yekaterinburg: UrFU, 2021. – 442 p.
4. Skachek M. A. Treatment of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste of nuclear power plants. – M.: Publishing house of the MEI, 2007. – 448 p.
5. Safety of nuclear power plant design. – Vienna: IAEA, 2016. – 116 p.
6. Moiseev G.K., Vyatkin G.P., Barbin N.M. Application of thermodynamic modeling for studying interaction taking into account ionic melts. – Chelyabinsk: SUSU, 2002. – 166 p.
7. Belov G.V., Trusov B.G. Thermodynamic modeling of chemically reacting systems. – M.: Bauman Moscow State Technical University, 2013. – 96 p.
8. Sinyarev G.B., Vatolin N.A., Trusov B.G., Moiseev G.K. Application of computers for thermal calculations of metallurgical processes. – M.: Nauka, 1982. – 267 p.
9. Barbin N. M., Sidash I. A., Terentyev D. I., Alekseev S. G. Computer modeling of thermal processes involving radionuclides U, Cl, Pu, Be, Ni, Am during heating of radioactive graphite in the atmosphere of carbon dioxide // Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. – 2019. – No. 2. – pp. 185-197. – DOI 10.26583/npe.2019.2.16. (in Russian).
10. Barbin N. M., Sidash I. A., Terentyev D. I., Alekseev S. G. Computer modeling of thermal processes involving radionuclides of calcium, strontium and caesium during heating of radioactive graphite in the atmosphere of carbon dioxide // Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. – 2017. – No. 1. – pp. 73-82. – DOI 10.26583/npe.2017.1.07. (in Russian).
11. Barbin N. M., Kobelev A.M., Titov S. A., Trent’ev D. I. // Composition of the gas-plasma phase in the radioactive graphite – water vapor system // Journal of Physics: Conference Series: 12, Sochi, October 25-27, 2021. – Sochi, 2022. – P. 012026. – DOI 10.1088/1742-6596/2150/1/012026.
12. Bazhenov V.A., Buldakov L.A., Vasilenko I.Ya. Harmful chemicals. Radioactive substances. – L.: Chemistry, 1990. – 189 p. (in Russian).
13. Shidlovsky V.V., Romenkov A.A., Khattarova E.A. Guskov A.V., Martianov V.V. Analysis of the radiation hazard of graphite masonry of stopped industrial uranium-graphite reactors of FSUE “PO “MAYAK” // In the collection: Annual report NIKIET-2010 Moscow. – 2010. – pp. 178-180 (in Russian).