+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/11.pdf"
first_page="127"
last_page="139"
udc=""
title="Study into the dependence of the Co-60 and Lu-177g efficiency production on the energy structure of neutron flux density"
original_title="Исследование зависимости эффективности наработки Co-60 и Lu-177g от энергетической структуры плотности нейтронного потока"
authors=["ShaginyanRA", "KorobeynikovVV", "StogovVY"]
tags=["production, isotopes", "specific activity", "cross section", "group", "Co-59", "Co-60", "Lu-177g", "Lu-176", "Yb-176"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.11"

+++

At present, the existing approaches to production of artificial isotopes are mostly based on the development experience from previous years. This work aims to develop an algorithm for selecting the most effective irradiation modes for target materials. The study is based on sequential modeling of irradiation of target isotopes by neutrons of different ‘single-group’ fluxes at the same neutron flux density within each energy group (ABBN-93). In this study, a flux density equal to 2Ч10 15 n/(cm 2Чs) was used for each energy group. This approach will help ‘designing’ and selecting the actual neutron spectrum that has the highest efficiency compared to alternatives.

The study modelled Co-60 and Lu-177g production for each energy group. The kinetics was analyzed in the most efficient groups in terms of specific activity.

The maximum specific activity for Co-60 is reached in group 17 and is equal to 1 kCi/g.

For the scheme of Lu-177g production through Lu-176, the maximum specific activity is reached in group 26 and is equal to 58.5 kCi/g.

For the scheme of Lu-177g production through Yb-176, the maximum specific activity is reached in group 17 and is equal to 260 Ci/g, the groups advantageous for production are 15–17 and 26

### References

1. Risovanyy V.D. Radioisotope production in fast-neutron nuclear reactors. Proc. Conf. «Closing the Nuclear Power Fuel Cycle Based on Fast Neutron Reactors» Tomsk, Oct. 11-12, 2018. Мoscow. Publ. NIKIET JSC, 2020. pp. 179–189 (in Russian).
2. Kamovich M.S., Stogov V.Yu., Gurskaya O.S.The irradiating device for the fast reactor of big power // Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Seriya: Yadernye konstanty. 2019, no. 2, pp. 228–233 Available at: : https://vant.ippe.ru/images/pdf/2019/2-22.pdf (accessed Nov. 11, 2022) (in Russian).
3. Dzugkoeva E. M., Evdokimov V. P., Stogov V. Yu., Shaginyan R. A. Study of the possibility of production of cobalt-60 of a given specific activity in a reactor of BN-800 type. Proc. of the scientific and practical Conf. «Nuclear technologies: from research to implementation – 2021». Nizhny Novgorod – Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University n.a. R.E. Alekseev, 2021. – pp. 38–40 (in Russian).
4. Atom for health // Vestnik atomproma, No. 3, april 2022, p. 59. Available at: https://atomvestnik.ru/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/VA3_spreads.pdf (accessed Nov. 11, 2022) (in Russian).
5. Isotope Production at the Hanford Site in Richland, Washington, report, June 1, 1999; Richland, Washington. (https://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc877112/: accessed Novemver 10, 2022), University of North Texas Libraries, UNT Digital Library, https://digital.library.unt.edu; crediting UNT Libraries Government Documents Department.
6. Shaginyan R.A., Korobeinikov V.V., Stogov V.Yu. Study of the dependence of the efficiency of various isotopes on the energy structure of the neutron flux density: IPPE Preprint 3302. Obninsk, IPPE JSC Publ., 2022. 44 p. (in Russian).
7. Evdokimov V.P., Poplavsky V.M., Saraeva T.O., Khomyakov Yu.S., Tsibulya A.M., Abdurashitov D.N., Gavrin V.N. The possibilities of fast power reactors to create high intensity radioactive sources. Proceedings of the PHYSOR 2002 – International Conference on the New Frontiers of Nuclear Technology: Reactor Physics, Safety and High-Performance Computing – The ANS 2002 RPD Topical Meeting, Seoul, 07–10 October 2002. Seoul, 2002.
8. STRANA ROSATOM. Cobalt-60: points of growth. Available at: https://strana-rosatom.ru/2017/11/30/kobalt-60-tochki-rosta/ (accessed Nov. 10, 2022) (in Russian).
9. Mal’tsev V.V., Karpenko A.I., Chernov I.A., Golovin V.V. Expirience with 60 Co production in BN-600. Atomic Energy. 1999, vol. 86, no. 3, pp. 219-221; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02672950.
10. Golubev V.I., Dolgov E.V., Efremov A.I., Zvonarev A.V., Korobeynikov V.V., Kolyjenkov V.A., Koloskov B.V., Liforov V.G., Matveev V.I., Matveenko I.P., Suslov I.R., Khomyakov Yu.S., Chernyi V.A. Calculated pilot studies in justification of irradiating devices for a cobalt-60 operating time. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Seriya: Yadernye konstanty. 1991, no. 4, pp. 56-70 (in Russian).
11. Zvonarev A.V., Korobeinikov V.V., Matveenko I.P., Suslov I.R., Khomyakov Yu.S., Tsibulya A.M., Chernui V.I., Shkol’nik V.S., Netsvet V.P., Skorikov N.V., Zinov’ev A.I., Rodionov N.G. 60 Со productionin BN-350 // Atomic Energy, 1994, vol. 77, no. 6., pp. 940–943. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02415548.
12. Varivtsev A.V., Zhemkov I.Yu., Romanov E.G., Tikhonchev M.Yu., Toporov Yu.G. Physical optimization of the irradiating device for accumulation of a cobalt-60 of a high specific activity in the BN-600 reactor. Izvestiya Samarskogo nauchnogo centra Rossiyskoj akademii nauk. 2014, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 112–118. Available at: http://www.ssc.smr.ru/izv_2014_6.html (accessed Nov. 7, 2022) (in Russian).
13. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsybulya A.M. The system of group constants BNAB-93. Part 1. Nuclear constants for calculating neutron and photon radiation fields. Voprosy atomnoy nauki i tehniki. Seriya: Yadernye konstanty. 1996, no. 1, pp. 59–98 (in Russian).
14. Tormyshev I.V. Software package for calculating the radiation characteristics of fuel and structural materials. ISKRA, version 1.0. Certificate of State Registration, No. 2020660280, 2022 (in Russian).
15. Tarasov V.A., Romanov E.G., Kuznetsov R.A. Comparative analysis of flowsheets for lutetium-177 reactor production. Izvestiya Samarskogo nauchnogo centra Rossiyskoj akademii nauk. 2013, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1084–1090. Available at: http://www.ssc.smr.ru/izv_2013_4.html#part5 (accessed Nov. 7, 2022) (in Russian).
16. Kosуakin D.A., Korobeinikov V.V., Stogov V.Yu. Evaluation of the relationship of the Am-241 transmutation efficiency with the energy structure of the neutron flux density. Voprosy atomnoj nauki i tehniki. Seriya: Yadernye konstanty. 2022, no. 1, pp. 5–15. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2022/1/nuclear-structure/2111-1.html (accessed Nov. 8, 2022) (in Russian).