+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/13.pdf"
first_page="146"
last_page="152"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Investigation of the BN-350 Fast Rreactor Fuel Performance"
original_title="Исследования характеристик топлива быстрых реакторов в БН-350"
authors=["KhomyakovYuS", "ZabrodskaiaSV", "SemenovMYu"]
tags=["actinides", "fast reactor", "nuclear fuel", "neutron cross-sections", "transmutation", "fuel cycle"]
rubric = "letters"
rubric_name = "Letters ti the editorial office"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.13"

+++

This paper presents the review of the experimental activities to investigate transmutation changes in different types of fuel and actinide samples in conditions of neutron irradiation in the BN-350 fast reactor. These experiments are of interest for justifying the transition to a closed nuclear fuel cycle. The paper describes the experimental methodology of needle detectors in the FA space between fuel elements, an integrated gravichemical methodology for investigating the nuclide composition in irradiated samples, and experimental programs for investigation of uranium, mixed uranium-plutonium and thorium fuel, as well as for transmutation of minor actinides. Generalized results are presented from comparing calculated and experimental data on the nuclide composition and the average neutron cross-section in different spectra of the BN-350 zones.

### References

1. Goncharov R.K., Zvonarev A.V., Ivanov V.I., Kazanskiy Yu.A., Koloskov B.V., Nikolaev M.N., Pavlovich V.V., Petrukhin V.A., Semenov M.Yu., Skorikov N.V., Smetanin E. Ya., Tsiboulya A.M., Shkolnik V.S. Comparison with Calculation of Alfa Uranium-235 and Plutonium-239 Values Determined from an Analysis of Irradiated Fuel. Atomnaya Energiya. 1986, v. 61, iss. 6, pp. 456-457 (in Russian).
2. Khomyakov Yu., Kotchetkov A., Nerozin N., Semenov M., Smetanin E., Tsiboulya A. Evaluation of the Activation and Burn-Up Experiments Carried Out in BN-350 Reactor. Proc. of the PHYSOR-2002, Seoul, Korea. Oct. 7-10, 2002, p. 280-293.
3. Kotchetkov A., Nerozin N., Khomyakov Yu., Semenov M., Smetanin E., Tsiboulya A. Calculation and Experimental Studies on Minor Actinides Samples Irradiations in Fast Reactors. Proc. of the VII-th Information Exchange Meeting on Actinide and Fission Product Partitioning Transmutation (P&T-2002), OECD/IAEA, Korea, Jiju. Oct. 14-15, 2002, p. 125-137.
4. Nikolaev M.N., Kosheev V.N., Korchagina J.A., Zabrodskaya S.V., Tsiboulya A.M. Neutron Cross-Section Library in Constant System ABBN-93. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 1999, iss. 2, pp. 33-39 (in Russian).
5. Krachko М.V., Zabrodskaya S.V., Semenov М.Yu., Khomyakov Yu.S. The Software Package for Calculating the Isotopic Composition of the Fuel. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 2018, iss. 2, pp. 99-112 (in Russian).