+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/14.pdf"
first_page="153"
last_page="158"
udc=" 621.039.59"
title="Studies of the BN-350 Reactor Fuel, Structural and Absorbing Materials at the Hot Laboratory of the IPPE"
original_title="Материаловедческие исследования топливных, конструкционных и поглощающих материалов реактора БН-350 в горячей лаборатории ГНЦ РФ – ФЭИ"
authors=["PorolloSI", "DvoriashinAM", "TarasikovVP", "IvanovAA", "ShulepinSV"]
tags=["BN-350 reactor", "fuel element", "corrosion", "fuel composition", "material test samples", "swelling", "radiation creep"]
rubric = "letters"
rubric_name = "Letters ti the editorial office"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.14"

+++

Studies of the BN-350 reactor fuel, structural and absorbing materials conducted at the hot laboratory of the IPPE are described in brief. In total, five driver and four experimental fuel assemblies, two safety rod guide tubes, and ten control rods were investigated. In addition, more than 10,000 material test samples of austenitic and ferrite-martensitic steels, high-nickel alloys and pure metals were studied.


### References

1. Porollo S.I., Yu.V. Konobeev, Garner F.A. Swelling of Safety Rod Guide Tubes in Nonuniform Fields of Temperature and Irradiation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no.1, pp. 66-75 (in Russian).
2. Moseev L.I., Vorobyov A.N., Zabudko L.M., Kiryanov B.S., Porollo S.I., Shoulepin S.V., Antipov S.A., Menshikova T.S. In-Pile Tests and Post-Reactor Investigations of Fuel Elements with U-Pu Fuel. Proc. of the Technical Committee Meeting «Influence of High Dose Irradiation on Core Structural and Fuel Materials in Advanced Reactor», Obninsk, Russia. IAEA-TEXDOC-1039, 1998, pp. 107-118.
3. Tarasikov V.P., Voznesenski R.M., Rudenko V.A. The Experience of Post Irradiation Investigations of the BN-350, BN-600 Control Rods. Proc. of the Technical Committee meeting held in Obninsk, Russian Federation, Jul. 3-7, 1995. IAEA-TECDOC-884, 1996, рp. 153-160.
4. Khabarov V.S., Dvoriashin A.M., Porollo S.I. Microstructure, Irradiation Hardening and Embrittlement of 13Cr2MoNbVB Ferritic-Martensitic Steel after Neutron Irradiation at Low Temperatures. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1996, v. 233-237, pp. 236-239.
5. Porollo S.I., Ivanov A.A., Shulepin S.V., Dvoriashin A.M., Ivanov S.N., Konobeev Yu.V. Structure and Short-Term Mechanical Properties Experimental Variants of Ferrite-Martensitic Steels after Low-Temperature Irradiation in BN-350 Reactor. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2021, iss. 1 (107), pp. 32-46 (in Russian).