+++

categories="article"
date="2023-09-25T00:08:00+03:00"
issue="2023-03"
issue_name="2023 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="16"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/03/16.pdf"
first_page="164"
last_page="169"
udc="621.181.6"
title="Reprocessing of Primary and Secondary Coolants During the BN-350 Reactor Decommissioning"
original_title="Переработка теплоносителя первого и второго контуров при выводе из эксплуатации реактора БН-350"
authors=["SmykovVB", "ZhurinAV", "LegkikhKG", "AlexeevVV", "ZhdanovVP"]
tags=["spent alkaline liquid metal coolant", "sodium", "sodium-potassium alloy", "BN-350 reactor", "BR-10 research reactor", "solid-phase oxidation", "slag", "gas-phase oxidation", "slag-like compound", "solid matrix", "liquid radioactive concentrates", "clinoptilolite"]
rubric = "letters"
rubric_name = "Letters ti the editorial office"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.16"

+++

The BN-350 was the world’s first pilot production liquid metal cooled fast reactor. The reactor’s design thermal power was 1000 MW. The power startup of the reactor took place in July 16, 1973. The decision to decommission the BN-350 reactor was made in 1999 by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Unfortunately, no RW reprocessing technologies were available at the time, including for spent alkali liquid metal coolants (primary sodium). An individual problem is reprocessing of spent cold filter trap oxides (CFTO) in the primary and secondary circuits. The most difficult task is to reprocess the accumulated liquid radioactive water concentrates (liquid waste, LW). The amount of aqueous LW will grow during the decommissioning activity.

### References

1. Tazhibaeva I., Pustobaev S., Zhantikin T., et al. (44 authors). The Handling with Sodium Coolant at Fast Reactor BN-350. Almaty. Glory K ltd Publ., 2010, 320 p. ISBN 978-601-278-202-8 (in Russian).
2. Smykov V.B. Problems of Decommissioning Fast Reactors and Ways of their Solution on the Basis of the BR-10 Research Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2022, no. 2, pp. 90-102. DOI: http://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.09 (in Russian).
3. Smykov V.B., Legkikh K.G. Gas-Phase Oxidation as a Method of Neutralization of Non-Drainable ALMC Residues in Equipment. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty. 2022, iss. 4, pp. 145-148. ISSN: 2414-1038 (in Russian).
4. Smykov V.B., Pronin A.A., Legkikh K.G. The Way of Convertion the Equipment with Non-Drainable Residues of Alkali Metal in Safe State and Apparatus for their Realization. – Patent RF No. 2794139. 2023 (in Russian).
5. Skomorokhova C.N., Konovalov E.E., Starkov O.V., Kotchetkova E.A., Kopylov V.C., Poletakhina T.V., Trifanova E.M. Harmless the RW of Alkali Metals by Processing in Alkali Water Solution then into the Geo-Cement Stone. Izvestia visshikh uchebnikh zavedeniy. Yadernaya energetica. 1999, no. 3, pp. 58-66 (in Russian).