+++

categories = "article"
date = "2016-03-28T01:27:53+03:00"
file = "/pdf/2016/02/2016-02-article-01.pdf"
issue = "2016-02"
issue_name = "2016 - #02"
authors = ["AnokhinAN", "KalinushkinAE", "GorbaevVA", "SivokonVP"]
tags = ["nuclear power plant", "main control room operator", "operator support system", "support function", "task of support"]
number = "01"
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
title = "NPP operator support systems: state of art and development prospects"
udc = "04.89:621.039"


+++


The growing interest in the subject of NPP operator support systems (OSS) inspired us to prepare an analytical review which is described in the present article. 
The following systemic principles are proposed as a result from this review. 
The aim of NPP OSS is to prevent or decrease frequency and importance of operators’ errors. 
In order to achieve this aim OSS should perform four operator support functions, namely: facilitation ofsituation awareness, assistance in adequate estimation of situation, assistance in planning of reaction and prevention of errors when performing actions. 
Performance of the functions is ensured by execution of support tasks, such as step-by-step representation of operating procedures, operators’ attentional control, etc. 
Six criteria for categorization of NPP OSS are proposed, namely: way of realization, covered part of NPP, type of support, type of task, task execution phase to be supported and relevance to operational mode.

Currently, two types of operator support are used, namely intellectual and information support. 
Safety parameters display system, alarm processing and presentation system and computerized procedure system can be attributed to the first group. 
The second group comprises overview display, task#based display and function-oriented display. 
The following trends of NPP OSS development became apparent: risk estimation and accident management systems, overall diagnosis and operational mode supervision systems, ecological interface design and information rich design.

The proposed systematization enables to identify the most effective operator support functions depending of NPP operational mode. 
These functions are oriented to the AES-2006 type of NPP as well as to the set of operational procedures available for MCR operators and to functionality of power unit I&C system.

### References

1. Bashlykov A.A., Eremeev A.P. Ekspertnye sistemy podderzhki prinyatiya reshenij v energetike [Expert systems for support of decision making in power engineering]. Moscow. MEI Publ., 1994. 216 p. (in Russian).
2. Anokhin A.N., Ostrejkovskij V.A. Voprosy ergonomiki v yadernoj energetike [Ergonomics issues in application to nuclear power engineering]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 2001. 344 p. (in Russian).
3. Golikov YU.A., Kostin A.N. Psikhologiya avtomatizatsii upravleniya tekhnikoj [Psychological aspect of automation of control in technical systems]. Moscow. IP RAN Publ., 1996. 160 p. (in Russian).
4. Mashin V.A. Komp’yuterizirovannye sistemy podderzhki operatorov AES (psikhologicheskie problemy) [Computerized systems for support of NPP operators: psychological issues]. Elektricheskie Stantsii, 1995, no. 7, pp. 2–7 (in Russian).
5.  Lee S.J., Seong P.H. Design of an integrated operator support system for advanced NPP MCRs: issues and perspectives. In: Progress of Nuclear Safety for Symbiosis and Sustainability: Advanced Digital Instrumentation, Control and Information Systems for Nuclear Power Plants by H. Yoshikawa, Z. Zhang (eds.). Springer, 2014. Ch. 2, pp. 11–26.
6. Desyatnikov I.I., Ermolaev A.D., Rakitin I.D. Povyshenie kachestva informatsionnogoobespecheniya operatora AES v anomal’nykh situatsiyakh [Improvement of information support of NPP operator under abnormal situations]. Atomnaya Tekhnika za Rubezhom, 1986, no. 7, pp. 15–17 (in Russian).
7. Jang G.-S., Suh S.-M., Park J.-Y., Kim Y.-K. A framework of an active alarm processing for an advanced nuclear power plant. Proc. 6th ANS Int. Topical Meeting on Nuclear Plant Instrumentation, Control, and Human"Machine Interface Technologies: NPIC & HMIT 2009. La Grange Park, ANS, 2009.
8. Podshibyakin M.A., Vasin V.M., Germash M.M., Strebnev N.A., Martynov A.V., Podshibyakin A.K. Voprosy kontseptsii sozdaniya sistemy predstavleniya parametrov bezopasnosti RU VVER [Issues of the concept of developing the system for displaying safety parameters of VVER RP]. Materialy VIII Mezhdunarodnoj nauchno-tekhnicheskoj konf. «Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES s VVER» (Proc. 8<sup>th</sup> Int. Conf. on Safety Assurance of NPP with WWER). Podol’sk. Gidropress Publ., 2013.
9.  Hsieha M.-H., Hwanga S.-L., Liua K.-H., Liangb S.-F.M., Chuangc C.-F. A decision support system for identifying abnormal operating procedures in a nuclear power plant. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2012, v. 249, pp. 413–418
10. Niwa Y., Hollnagel E. Integrated computerization of operating procedures. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2002, v. 213, pp. 289–301.
11. Ma J., Jiang J. Applications of fault detection and diagnosis methods in nuclear power plants: a review. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2011, v. 53, pp. 255–266.
12. Galbally J., Galbally D. A pattern recognition approach based on DTW for automatic transient identification in nuclear power plants. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2015, v. 81, pp. 287–300.
13. Hwang S.-L., Lina J.-T., Lianga G.-F., Yaua Y.-J., Yennb T.-C., Hsub C.-C. Application control chart concepts of designing a pre-alarm system in the nuclear power plant control room. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2008, v. 238, pp. 3522–3527.
14. Anokhin A.N. Adaptivnyj interfejs dlya operatorov slozhnykh sistem [An adaptive interface for complex system operators]. Trudy XII Vserossijskogo soveshchaniya po problemam upravleniya: VSPU-2014 (Proc. 12<sup>th</sup> All-Russian Topical Meeting on Problems of Control). Moscow. Institut problem upravleniya im. V.A. Trapeznikova RAN Publ., 2014, pp. 6345–6356 (in Russian).
15.  Kvalem J., Braseth A.O., Hurlen L., Karlsson T., Nihlwing C. What constitutes a good human system interface? Lessons learned from Halden project research. Proc. 7<sup>th</sup> ANS Int. Topical Meeting on Nuclear Plant Instrumentation, Control, and Human-Machine Interface Technologies: NPIC & HMIT 2010. Las Vegas, 2010.
16.  Andresen G. Information display design: three attempts at superseding the traditional process mimic display. In: Simulator-Based Human Factors Studies Across 25 Years: The History of the Halden Man-Machine Laboratory by A.B. Skjerve, A. Bye (eds.). London: Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 169–180.
17. Vicente K. J., Rasmussen J. Ecological interface design: theoretical foundations. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics. 1992, v. 22, no. 4, pp. 589–606.
18. Anokhin A., Ivkin A. Evaluation of ecological interface design for supporting cognitive activity of nuclear plant operators. Proc. 5<sup>th</sup> Int. Conf. on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics 2014. Krakow, 2014, pp. 260–270.
19. Anokhin A., Lourie V., Dzhumaev S., Golovanev V., Kompanietz N. Upgrade of the Kursk NPP main control room (case study). Proc. Int. Control Room Design Conf.: ICOCO 2010. Loughborough, IEHF, 2010, pp. 207–214.
20. Braseth A.O., Nurmilaukas V., Laarni J. Realizing the information rich design for the Loviisa nuclear power plant. Proc. 7<sup>th</sup> ANS Int. Topical Meeting on Nuclear Plant Instrumentation, Control, and Human-Machine Interface Technologies: NPIC & HMIT 2010. La-Grange Park, ANS, 2010.
