+++

categories = "article"
date = "2016-03-28T01:23:53+03:00"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/02/05.pdf"
issue = "2016-02"
issue_name = "2016 - #02"
authors = ["MilinchukVK", "KlinshpontER", "BelozerovVI", "KhavroshinaIS", "SadikovEI"]
tags = ["aluminium", "aluminium oxide", "water", "hydrogen", "irradiation dose", "the kinetics of generation", "annealing", "transformation of the oxide coating"]
number = "05"
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
title = "The transformation of the oxide coatings of aluminium by imitation factors of nuclear power plants"
udc = "620.9+544 (075)"


+++

The article presents the results of studies on the kinetics of hydrogen generation by heterogeneous compositions with aluminum exposed to γ-irradiation in air, various aqueous solutions at room temperature and high temperature annealing.
It is established that the kinetics of hydrogen generation depends on the dose of γ-irradiation, temperature and composition of the aqueous medium. 
Changes in
hydrogen generation kinetics are due to transformations of aluminium oxide
coatings induced by factors simulating the NPP conditions. 
The effect of metal oxide coating transformations should be considered in predicting the corrosion resistance of NPP structural materials.

The studied kinetics of hydrogen generation by compositions with aluminum has shown that a kinetic method allows valuable information to be obtained on chemical transformations of aluminum oxide coatings under the action of factors simulating the PWR core. 
Being exposed to radiation, high temperature, aqueous medium radiolysis products and oxygen, aluminum oxide coatings undergo transformations which result in violations of aluminum oxide film integrity. 
Water molecules, the exothermal reactions of which lead to aluminum corrosion with the formation of molecular hydrogen and solid products, diffuse to the formed “pure” metal areas through structural coating defects. 
The mechanism of hydrogen and solid product contribution to oxide coating destruction of aluminum is being studied.

### References

1. Milinchuk V.K., Klinshpont E.R., Belozerov V.I., Ananyeva O.A., Laricheva T.E., Kunitsyna T.E. Himicheskoe raslozhenie vodyi na vodorod v geterogennih aluminiysoderzhaschih kompozitsiyah [The chemical decomposition of water into hydrogen of aluminum in heterogeneous compositions]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 32 – 38 (in Russian).
2. Klinshpont E.R., Roschektaev B.M., Milinchuk V.K. Kinetika nakopleniya vodoroda pri chimicheskom razlogenii vodyi v geterogennih kompoziayh. [Kinetics of the accumulation of hydrogen in chemical decomposition of water in heterogeneous compositions.] Al’ternativnaya entrgetika i ekologiya. ISJAEE. 2012, no. 9, pp. 116 – 120 (in Russian).
3. Milinchuk V.K., Klinshpont E.R., Belozerov V.I. Avtonomnyj generator vodoroda na osnove himicheskogo razlozheniya vody aluminiyem. [Standalone hydrogen generator based on the chemical decomposition of water with aluminum.] Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 2, pp. 49 – 59 (in Russian).
4. Roschektaev B.M. Vodnochimicheskiy rezhim AES s reactorami VVER-1000 i RBMK-1000 [The water  chemical mode of NPP with VVER-1000 and RBMK-1000] Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2010. 132 p. (in Russian).
5. Maslyaev S.A., Morozov E.V., Romahin P.A., Pimenov V.N., Gribkov V.A., Tihonov A., Bondarenko G.G., Dubrovskij A.V., Kazilin E.E., Sasinovskaya I.P., Sinicyna O.V. Povrezhdaemost oksida alyuminiya moshhnymi impulsnymi potokami ionov, plazmy i lazernogo izlucheniya. Fizika i himiya obrabotki materialov. 2015, no, 3, pp. 517 (in Russian).
6. Kortov V.S., Nikiforov S.V. , Moiseikin E.V., Vokhmintsev A.S., Simanov A.G. Luminescent and Dosimetric Properties of Nanostructured Ceramics Based on Aluminum Oxide. Physics of the Solid State. 2013, v. 55, no. 10, pp. 2088–2093.
7. Schembri V.L., Heijmen B.J. Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) of carbondoped aluminum oxide (Al<cup>2</cup>O<cup>3</cup>C) for film dosimetry in radiotherapy. Med Phys. 2007, v. 34(6), pp. 2113-2118.
8. Wang Hu Bi , Zeale Y.W. Performance of Al<cup>2</cup>O<cup>3</cup>: optically stimulated luminescence dosimeters for clinical radiation therapy applications. Australas Phys Eng Sci Med. 2009, v.32, no. 4, pp. 226-232.
9. Azorin J.L., Esparza A, Falcony C, Rivera T, Garcia M, Martinez E. Preparation and thermoluminescence properties of aluminium oxide doped with europium. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2002, v.100, no. 14, pp. 277-280.
10. De Azevedo W.M., De Oliveira G.B., Da Silva E.F. Jr, Khoury H.J., Oliveira de Jesus E.F. Highly sensitive thermoluminescent carbon doped nanoporous aluminium oxide detectors. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 2006, v.119, no 1 4, pp. 201-205.
11. Huang Guanglin, Wang J. ESR study on radiation grafting reaction of Al2O3. Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 1993, v. 42, no. 1–3, pp. 61-63.
12. Nagabhushana K.R., Lakshminarasappa B.N., Chandrappa G.T., Haranath D.. Swift heavy ion induced photoluminescence studies in Aluminum oxide. Radiation Effects and Defects in Solids: Incorporating Plasma Science and Plasma Technology. 2007, v. 162, no. 5, pp. 325-332.
13. Andreev N.S., Emeline A.V., Polikhova S.V., Ryabchuk V.K., Serpone N. Photoinduced adsorption of hydrogen and methane on gammaalumina. The photoinduced chesorluminescence (PhICL) effect. Langmuir. 2004, v. 20, no. 1, pp. 129-135.
14. Abdulghani Kerm. The study of some properties of Aluminum Oxide AL2O3 Irradiated with Heavy Ions. International Journal of Pure and Applied Physics. 2009, v. 5, no. 3, pp. 231–237.
15. Zacepin D.A., Cherkashenko V.M., Kurmaev E.Z., Shamin S.N., Fedorenko V.V., Skorikov N.A., Plastinin S.V., Gavrilov N.V., Medvedev A.I., Cholax S.O. Rentgenoemissionnoe issledovanie elektronnoj struktury nanokristallicheskogo Al<cup>2</cup>O<cup>3</cup>. Fizika tverdogo tela. 2004, v. 46, no. 11. pp. 20642968 (in Russian).
16. Gadzhieva N.N. The radiation Oxidation of Aluminum in Contact with Water. Protection of Metals. 2007, v. 43, no. 4, pp. 383387.
17. Hickman B.S., Walker D.G. The effect of neutron irradiation on aluminium oxide. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1966, v. 18, no. 2, pp. 197205.
18. Kovtunenko P.V. Fizicheskaya himiya tvyordogo tela. Kristally s defectami. [Physical chemistry of solids. The crystals with defects.] Manual for chemical technology universities. Moscow. Vysshaya shkola Publ., 1993. 352 p. (in Russian).
19. Kalin B.A., Platonov P.A., Tuzov Yu.V., Chernov I.I., Shtrombakh Ya.I. Fizicheskoe materialovedenie. V. 6. Konstruktslnnyie materialy yadernoj tehniki [Materials of construction of nuclear technology]. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2012. 736 p. (in Russian).
20. Pikaev A.K. Sovremennaya radiacionnaya himiya [Modern radiation chemistry.
Radiolysis gases and liquid]. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1986. 440 p. (in Russian).