+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2016-02"
issue_name="2016 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="08"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/02/08.pdf"
first_page="77"
last_page="86"
udc="621.039.54(04)"
title="The results of the transmuting minor actinides with thermal and fast reactors neutrons"
original_title="Результаты трансмутации малых актинидов в спектре нейтронов реакторов на тепловых и быстрых нейтронах"
authors=["KazanskyYA", "IvanovNV", "RomanovMI"]
tags=["transmutation", "minor actinides", "spent fuel", "radioactivity", "biological hazard"]
rubric="fuelcycle"
rubric_name="Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.2.08"

+++

One of the problems of nuclear energy is the accumulation of radioactive waste. There are many scenarios treatment of spent nuclear fuel (SNF).  One of them with a closed fuel cycle and reproduction of fissile nuclei is the transmutation of minor actinides (MA) in the fission fragments in fast reactors.  In the present paper considered the radiation characteristics, depending on the time, after irradiation MA in the spectra of neutrons of thermal and fast reactors.  The irradiation time was chosen to be 25 years. During this time, burn up in the thermal reactor was about 95%, and in the fast reactor about 75%.  Transmutation efficiency is determined by a time-dependent after irradiation «coefficient of transmutation».  Coefficient of transmutation is the ratio of the radioactivity (or biological hazards on the air or on the water) after the transmutation of the isotope (isotopes) to its radioactivity without transmutation.  This is a positive number in the range from 0 to infinity.

Calculations showed that coefficient of transmutation of the burning of the MA in the thermal reactor (at the same time of irradiation to thermal and fast reactors) have notable advantages over coefficient of transmutation during burning in the fast reactors. Importantly, the thermal reactor burn up MA of 95% is achieved while 40 – 60% smaller than in the fast breeder reactor.

Analyzed the results of transmutation. Significant gains in radioactivity can be obtained for americium and curium after 25 years irradiation through decades.  The gain in the case of irradiation of neptunium can be obtained through decades and the hundreds of thousands of years (depending on the irradiation time).

Shown that efficiency of the amplitude and time depends on the criterion of radioactivity (radioactivity, the biological effectiveness of permissible concentrations in air and water). In particular, coefficient of transmutation on basis biological hazards nuclides in the air could differ significantly from coefficient of transmutation on radioactivity. At 10 times coefficient of transmutation on basis biological hazards in the air in the first thousand years less than the same coefficient on the basis of radioactivity.  At the same time, the coefficient of transmutation on basis biological hazards nuclides in the water do not differ significantly from the transmutation of the coefficients on radioactivity.

### References

1. Leypunsky A.I, Orllov V.V., Lytkin V.B., Troyanov M.F., Yurova L.N. Puti effektivnogo ispol’zovaniya goryuchego v yadernoy energetike s bystrymi reaktorami [The effective use of fuel in nuclear power with fast reactors]. Atomnaya energiya. 1971, v. 31, no. 4, p. 241 (in Russian).
2. Use of Fast Reactors for Actinide Transmutation. Proceedings of a Specialists Meeting held in Obninsk, Russian Federation, 22-24 September 1992. IAEA-TECDOC-693. IAEA, 1993.
3. Matveev V.I., Ivanov A.P., Efimenko E.M.. Concept of Specialized Fast Reactor for Minor Actinide Burning. In [2], p.114.
4. Gay E.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Rabotnov N.S., Shubin Yu.N.. Koncepciya obrashcheniya s dolgozhivushchimi yadernymi othodami [Concept treatment of long-lived nuclear waste management]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1994, no. 1, pp. 17-21 (in Russian).
5. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I., Sinitsyna V.V.. Vyzhiganie transuranovyh ehlementov v zhestkom spektre nejtronov [Burning of transuranic elements in the hard neutron spectrum]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaja Energetika. 2000, no. 3, pp. 76-81 (in Russian).
6. Ganev I. Kh., Lopatkin A. V., Orlov V. V. Geterogennaya transmutaciya Am, Cm, Np v aktivnoj zone reaktora tipa BREST [Heterogeneous Transmutation of Am, Cm, and Np in the core of a brest reactor]. Atomic Energy, v. 89, no. 5, 2000, pp. 362-365 (in Russian).
7. Tommasi J. Heterogeneous Recycling of Americium in Thermal and Fast Reactors. Int. Conf. On Future Nuclear Systems GLOBAL*97. Oct. 5-10 1997, Yokohama (Japan).
8. Krivitski I.Yu. Actinide and Fission Product Burning in Fast Reactors with a Moderator. Proc. of the Int. Conf. On Future Nucl. Syst. GLOBAL*99. USA, Aug. 29 – Sept. 3, 1999.
9. NEA, Potential Benefits and Impacts of Advanced Nuclear Fuel Cycles with Actinide Partitioning and Transmutation, OECD, Paris, France, 2011.
10. Andrianov A.A, Dogov A.A, Korovin Y.A, Kuptcov I.S. The approach to determining the optimal strategy for the nuclear transmutation. Nuclear Physics and Engineering, TE 5, no. 2, 2014, 122 p.
11. Status of minor actinide fuel development. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009.
12. Bergelson B. R., Belonog V. V., Gerasimov A. S., Tikhomirov G. V.. Utilizaciya Am, Cm, Np v ehnergeticheskom yadernom reaktore [Np, Am, Cm utilization in a nuclear power reactor]. Atomic Energy, v. 107, no. 2, 2009, pp. 79-86 (in Russian).
13. Kazansky Yu.A., Romanov M.I. Transmutaciya malyh aktinidov v spektre nejtronov reaktora na teplovyh nejtronah [Transmuting minor actinides with thermal reactor neutrons]. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 140-146 (in Russian).
14. Nuclear Energy Agency, No. 6997, Minor Actinide Burning in Thermal Reactors, OECD, 2013.
15. Kazansky Yu.A, Klinov D.A. Effektivnost’ transmutacii oskolkov deleyniya [Transmutation Efficiency of Fission Fragments.] Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2000, no. 4, pp. 38-46 (in Russian).
16. Normy radiathionnoy bezopasnosti (NRB 99/2009) (in Russian).
17. Croff A.G. A User’s Manual for the ORIGEN2 Computer Code. July, 1980.
18. Kolobashkin V.M., Rubtsov P.M., Ruzhansky P.A., Sidorenko V.D. Radiation Characteristics of the Irradiated Fuel. Reference book. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983 (in Russian).
19. Nuclear Energy Agency, TECDOC-866, «Fast Reactor Database». IAEA. Viena. 1996.