+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2016-02"
issue_name="2016 - #02"
number="14"
file="pdf/2016/02/2016-02-article-14.pdf"
udc="621.039.73"
title="Conceptual aspects of melting unit vessel cooling by heavy liquid metal coolant"
authors=["LegkikhAY", "AskhadullinRS", "MartynovPN", "MelnikovVP",
"StorozhenkoAN"]
tags=["liquid metal coolant", "steel vessel", "heat removal", "melting unit", "surface", "calculation", "leadbismuth", "temperature"]
rubric="coolants"
rubric_name="Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"

+++

The goal of the article is to present conceptual analysis of feasibility of leadbismuth
coolant application for cooling steel vessel of melting unit designed for implementation
of the new effective technology of radwaste reprocessing. In support of leadbismuth
coolant feasibility, the main advantages and specific features of its application are
presented, taking into account significant experience gained in Russia in handling this coolant (nuclear submarines reactor units and test facilities), availability of jobproved
methods and equipment for the coolant quality control, and coolant properties assuring
fire and explosion safety and heat removal capability under high temperature and low
pressure conditions. The preliminary evaluations were made on temperature distribution
in the mode of cooling of the melting unit steel vessel by the liquid leadbismuth using
simple onedimensional heat transfer model. Forced coolant flow provided by the pump
was considered in the analytical model. It was assumed that the coolant was flowing
within the gap between the external and internal steel walls to cool the melting unit,
while the excess heat was removed by the external heat exchanger. Radiation heat flux
from gas in the burning chamber, heat flux from the slag to the inner wall surface of
the vessel, and heat removed by the liquid metal coolant were taken into account in
the analysis. Emissivity factor of gas in the burning chamber was calculated taking into
account correction for mutual interference of CO2 and evaporated water absorption
bands. Calculations were made for the normal operation mode of the melting unit,
assuming presence of refractory coating and slag lining of certain thickness formed on
the inner surface of the vessel.

As follows from the results of evaluations, leadbismuth coolant is capable of
maintaining melting unit vessel surface temperature within permissible limits with the
reasonable coolant flow rate under normal operating conditions. Data presented in this
article have been obtained for the first time and may be useful in designing melting
units for radwaste reprocessing.

### References

1. Gudim Yu.A., Golubev A.A., Tregubov I.O. Pyrometallurgical reprocessing of low and medium metal radwaste and melting unit for its implementation. Fair of innovative projects in the area of radwaste management, decommissioning and ecological rehabilitation. Atomeco-2008. Proceedings of the conference. 2008, pp. 25-27 (in Russian).
2. Golubev A.A., Gudim Yu.A. Method of reprocessing of metal radioactive waste and the unit for its implementation. Patent 2345141 RF, MPK S21V13/00, S22V7/00, 2009 (in Russian).
3. Efanov A.D., Ivanov K.D., Martynov P.N., Orlov Yu.I. Leadbismuth coolant technology in the first and the second generation NPP. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2007, no. 1, pp.138-144 (in Russian).
4. Toshinsky G.I. A.I. Leypunsky and nuclear power plants with leadbismuth liquid metal coolant for nuclear submarines. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2003, no. 4, pp. 13-18 (in Russian).
5. Ryzhov S.B., Stepanov V.S., Toshinsky G.I., Klimov N.N., Zrodnikov A.V., Komlev O.G. Innovative design of SVBR100 reactor. Voprosy Atomnoj Nauki i Tehniki. Ser. Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES. 2009, iss. 24, pp. 5-7 (in Russian).
6. Martynov P.N., Askhadullin R.Sh., Orlov Yu.I., Storozhenko A.N. Current issues and problems of technology of NPP heavy liquid metal coolants (lead and leadbismuth). Proceedings of International conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC-2013)». Obninsk, 2013, pp. 42-51 (in Russian).
7. Toshinsky G.I., Komlev O.G., Tormyshev I.V., Petrochenko V.V. Effect of Potential Energy Stored in Reactor Facility Coolant on NPP Safety and Economic Parameters. World Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2013, no. 3. pp. 59-64.
8. Rusanov A.E., Levin O.E., Gushchina A.G. Studies on corrosion resistance of fuel element claddings made of EP823 steel after their tests in PbBi coolant flow. Proceedings of International conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC 2013)». Obninsk, 2013, pp. 287-297 (in Russian).
9. Gromov B.F., Yachmenyov G.S., Rusanov A.E. Oxygen inhibition of structural materials in liquid leadbismuth eutectic and lead. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1999, no. 4, pp. 89-96 (in Russian).
10. Martynov P.N., Askhadullin R.Sh., Simakov A.A., Lanskikh V.S., Gulevsky G.V. Solid phase technology of oxygen control in heavy liquid metal coolants. Novye Promyshlennye Tehnologii. CNILOT. 2004, no. 3, pp. 30-34 (in Russian).
11. Martynov P.N., Chernov M.E., Gulevsky V.A. Solid electrolyte sensor of oxygen content and methods of its fabrication. Patent 2298176 RF, MPK G01N 27/46, 2007 (in Russian).
12. Askhadullin R.Sh., Simakov A.A., Legkikh A.Yu. Solid phase oxidizers of PbBi and Pb coolants for creating and maintaining corrosionresistant films on the steels. Novye Promyshlennye Tehnologii. CNILOT. 2011, no.1, pp. 33-39 (in Russian).
13. Ulyanov V.V., Martynov P.N., Gulevsky V.A., Teplyakov Yu.A., Fomin A.S. Issues of application of «hydrogen  water steam  inert gas» mixtures in the liquid heavy metal coolant technology. Proceedings of Scientific and Technical Conference on Thermal Physics of Fast Neutron Reactors (Thermal Physics2013), Obninsk. 2013, pp. 507-510 (in Russian).
14. Gudim Yu.A., Golubev A.A., Ovchinnikov S.G., Zinurov I.Yu.Advanced technology of steel production using metal junk and metallized raw materials. Mettallurg. 2009, no. 4, pp. 32-35 (in Russian).
15. Kirillov P.L., Terentyeva M.I., Deniskina N.B. Thermophysical properties of nuclear engineering materials, under the general editorship of P.L. Kirillov; 2nd Edition. Moscow, IzdAT Publ., 2010, 200 p. (in Russian).
16. Blokh A.G., Zhuravlyov Yu.A., Ryzhkov L.N. Handbook: Radiation Heat Ttransfer. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1991 (in Russian).