+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2016-02"
issue_name="2016 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="15"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/02/15.pdf"
first_page="154"
last_page="162"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental studies into the processes accompanying an intercircuit steam generator break in the safe operating limits in HLMC reactor facilities"
original_title="Экспериментальные исследования процессов, сопровождающих межконтурную неплотность парогенератора в эксплуатационно-безопасных пределах в РУ с ТЖМТ"
authors=["BeznosovAV", "BokovaTA", "NovozhilovaOO", "MeluzovAG","MetrinskyRA", "NovinskyEG"]
tags=["steam leak between circuits", "HLMC RP", "coolant", "heat exchange"]
rubric="coolants"
rubric_name="Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.2.15"

+++

The results of the processes accompanying emergency «leakage of the steam generator (SG) between circuits» in the operating and safety limits in the reactor facilities with lead and lead-bismuth coolant (HLMC). Consumption of water, steam, entering through leaks in the coolant, consistent bubble and, in part, flare regimes expiration with the simulation conditions of the steam generator operation. Varied water flow regimes, the steam through the expiration of the holes of different geometry in the pipe system of SG, through a side opening in the narrowed portion of the ejector in the working gap of the labyrinth-screw pump with simulations varying degrees of dispersion bubbles «easy» phase in the coolant. The temperature of the molten lead was 400 – 550°C, pressure – 0,1 – 4,0 kgf<sup>2</sup>/cm, the water temperature at the inlet to the experimental plot 20°C, water pressure – 0,2 – 8,0 kgf<sup>2</sup>/cm, the water flow introduced into the liquid metal coolant – 0,5 – 200 kg/hr continuous steam pressure on the free surface of the coolant lead to 10.0 m<sup>3</sup>/m<sup>2</sup>⋅hr.

To vary the geometry of the flow channels of two-component streams: HLMC -water, steam, as well as design elements, streamlined two-component stream.

The results of analysis of investigation confirms the continuing ability exploitation the reactor plant with HLMC when the «leak the steam generator between circuits» crash occurs, with water and steam flow in exploitation-safety limits.

During such reactor circuit crash the pipes of steam generator system are exposed by strong temperature cycle vibrations. 
These vibrations could lead to fatigue damage of the pipes. 
It should be considered in designing of the steam generator system pipes in part of its resource and safety.

### References

1. Beznosov A.V., Churyumov V.I., Serov V.E., Leonov V.N., Smirnov V.P. Steam leak in the cooling circuit of the torus-reactions coolant lead. Nuclear energy and human security. Abstract number E93. The 4th Annual Conference of the nuclear Society RF. Nizhny Novgorod. 1993, pp. 552-555 (in Russian).
2. Beznosov A.V., Pinaev S.S., Davydov D.V., Molodtsov A.A., Bokova T.A., Martynov P.N., Rachkov V.I. Experimental studies of the characteristics of the contact heat exchange lead coolant - working body. Atomnaya Energiya. 2005, v. 98, no. 3, pp. 182 – 187 (in Russian).
3. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Molodcov A.A. Experimental investigations of processes accompanying intercontinental-temperature-leak steam generator with a lead and lead- bismuth-coolant. Teleconference and optimization of its design. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2006, no. 4, pp. 3 – 18 (in Russian).
4. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Novozhilova O.O., Matyuhin A.K., Himich V.L., Pichkov S.N. Experimental studies of the processes accompanying the accident «SG leakage between circuits» in the RP with HLMC. Izvestia Visshikh Uchebnikh Zavedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012. no. 4, pp. 92 – 101 (in Russian).
5. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A. The power circuit equipment with heavy liquid metal coolant in the nuclear industry. Nizhny Novgorod. Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University Publ., 2012. 536 p. (in Russian).
6. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Bokov P.A. Technology and outlines the basic equipment of reactor plants, industrial and research stands with lead and lead-bismuth coolant. Nizhny Novgorod. Litera Publ., 2016. 486 p. (in Russian).
7. Petukhov B.S. Handbook of thermal-hydraulic calculations. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987. 360 p. (in Russian).
8. Kirillov P.L. Bogoslovskaya G.P. Heat and mass transfer in nuclear power plant. Moscow. Energoatomisdat Publ., 2000. 456 p. (in Russian).
9. Beznosov A.V., Novozhilova, O. O., Molodtsov, A. A., Savinov S. Yu., T. A. Bokova, Khimich V. L. Characteristics of heat transfer of surface models of the active zone and the steam generator at the regulation of the NII of content of impurities in circuit with lead coolant. Atomnaya Energiya. 2008, v. 104, no. 2, pp. 74-80 (in Russian).
10. Beznosov A.V., Aronov M. V., Novozhilova O.O., Zudin A.D., Chernysh A.S. Experimental study of thermal-hydraulic characteristics of flow at a cross flow tubes steam-generator lead coolant. Atomnaya Energiya. 2015, v. 118, no. 5, pp. 266-271 (in Russian).
11. Beznosov A.V., Stepanov V.S., Leonov V.N. Equipment power circuits with heavy liquid metal coolants in nuclear power. Nizhny Novgorod, 2008. 690 p. (in Russian).
12. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Novozhilova O.O., Bokova T.A., Soloviev O.A. Problems highway control-of the temperature of the melt of lead at the test bench FT-4 NSTU. Proceedings of NSTU n.a. R. E. Alekseev. 2015, no. 1, pp. 134-138 (in Russian).
13. Beznosov A.V., Drozdov Yu. N., Antonenkov M. A., Bokova T.A., Lvov A.V., Lemekhov V.V. Experimental study of the flow part of axial pumps main circulation-sa reactor installations with heavy liquid metal coolant. Vestnik mashinisbroeniya. 2014, no. 2, pp. 53-56 (in Russian).
14. Beznosov A.V., Novozhilova O.O., Molodtsov A.A., Aronov M.V., Bokov P.A., Nazarov A.V. Reactor plant with horizontal steam generators. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernyh Reaktorov. 2013, no. 3, pp. 131-134 (in Russian).
15. Beznosov A.V., Lvov V.A., Bokov P.A., Lemehov V.V., Lar’kina Y.A. Nuclear power plant. Patent for useful model RUS 123183 25.06.2012 (in Russian).