+++

categories="article"
date="2016-03-28T01:11:53+03:00"
issue="2016-02"
issue_name="2016 - #02"
number="16"
file="pdf/2016-02/2016-02-article-16.pdf"
udc="621.039.58:504; 622.502"
title="Hydrogen concentration monitoring in subsoil air on tectonic faults on the territory adjacent to NPP"
authors=["IgnatenkoGK", "GremchenkoPI", "GlushkovYM"]
tags=["degassing", "suffosionkarst processes", "seismological monitoring", "fluids", "hydrogen concentration", "nuclear power", "weak seismicity"]
rubric="environmentalaspects"
rubric_name="Environmental aspects of nuclear power"

+++

Presented degassing process by tectonic fractures, the yield of hydrogen and its management as one of the indicators of geodynamics, more information base for monitoring of geodynamic and karstsuffosion processes and seismic monitoring of critical facilities, industrial and civil values in the platform areas.

Thanks to recently developed a portable hydrogen gas analyzers has become possible to use hydrogen as a tracer to determine the place of deep exhalation of fluids on the ground , thereby to control the dynamics of geodynamic processes like suffosion  karst and seismic activity, complementing the seismological monitoring of information.

Some of the benefits of monitoring the hydrogen concentration to assess the seismic and geodynamic conditions of the area of placement and operation of nuclear power sites.

As the object of field research area of Kalinin NPP was used, where according to the geological work identified tectonic fault.

Intended purpose of works on monitoring of the geological environment is the addition of information that characterizes the dynamics of exogenous geological processes in natural and anthropogenic influence of disturbed conditions in the areas of geological faults.

In the area of geodynamic active zone associated with a deep fault in the accommodation area of Kalinin Nuclear Power Plant marked the activity of karst and suffusion processes lineament zones of increased fracturing of rocks, form a ring structure subsidence, changes in the landscape structure dynamics.
The results of field measurements of subsurface hydrogen concentration along the route perpendicular to the tectonic fault lines.
It is shown that the concentration of hydrogen in the subsurface zone of tectonic fault takes extreme values, indicating that the activation of the geodynamic setting.

### References

1. Osika D.G. Fluid regime of tectonically active regions. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1981. 204 p. (in Russian).
2. Syvorotkin V.L. Deep degassing of the Earth and global catastrophes. Moscow. Geoinformсentr Publ., 2002. 205 p. (in Russian).
3. Litovchenko A.V., Ignatenko G.K., Litvinov A.V., Glushkov Yu.M. Some environmental processes in places where the depth of hydrogen. Proceedings of the International scientific conference «Global environmental processes». Moscow. Oct. 24, 2012, pp. 300-302 (in
Russian).
4. Larin V.N., Larin N.V., Litovchenko A.V., Ignatenko G.K. Safety of nuclear power plants in terms of intensification of deep degassing of the Earth. Report at the Scientific Session of Moscow Engineering Physics Institute, February, 2012 (in Russian).
5. Obzhirov A.I., Leo I.K., Korovitsky E.V. Distribution of hydrogen and hydrocarbon gases in Tonga island arc system. Pacific Geology. 2012, v.31, no. 4, pp. 87-92 (in Russian).
6. Nawrocki O.K., Timofeev G.I., Titarenko I.A., Pisarenko Yu.M., Dibrova A.I., Glukhov E.V. Gas fields at the junction of complex large geostructural blocks southeast part of the Russian Platform (Regional profile UvarovoFree, Saratov region). Proceedings of the Saratov University. New episode. Series: Earth sciences. 2012. v. 12, no. 2, pp. 77-84 (in Russian).
7. Bugaev E.G., Kishkin S.B., Sanin I.A. Features seismological monitoring of areas where nuclear power facilities on the East European platform. Yadernaya i radiacionnaya bezopasnost’. 2012, no. 3, p. 65 (in Russian).
8. RB-019-01. Safety Guide. Evaluation of seismic hazard areas placement of nuclear and radiation hazardous objects on the basis of geodynamic data. Resolution GAN RF from 29.12.2001 no. 10. Portal normativnyh dokumentov. Avaiable at http://www.opengost.ru/ (in Russian).
9. Litovchenko A.V., Ignatenko G.K., Larin N.V., Glushkov Yu.M. The patent for utility model no. 131487. IPC G01N. Bur for sampling subsoil air; applicant and patented Federal State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher Professional Education «National Research Nuclear University» Moscow Engineering Physics Institute (MEPhI); publ. 08.20.13. Bul. no. 22 (in Russian).
10. Litovchenko A.V., Ignatenko G.K., Larin N.V., Glushkov Yu.M., Litvinov A.V. A utility model patent no.132557. IPC G01N. A device for sampling subsoil / air; applicant and patentee Federal State Autonomous Educational Institution of Higher Professional Education «National Research Nuclear University» Moscow Engineering Physics Institute (MEPhI); publ. 03.10.13. Bul. no. 22 (in Russian).
11. Litovchenko A.V., Ignatenko G.K., Larin N.V., Litvinov A.V., Nikolaev I.N. The patent for the invention no.2502977. The method for determining the intensity of emission of gas is lighter than air from the surface of porous objects and device for its implementation. 12.27.2013 (in Russian).
12. Hudyakov G.I. Geoenvironmental problems of Balakovo NPP. Povolzhskij ecologicheskij zhurnal. 2003, no. 3, pp. 285-296 (in Russian).
13. Gufeld I.L., Matveeva M.I., Novoselov O.N. Why we cannot predict strong earthquakes in the Earth’s crust. Geodynamics & Tectonophysics. 2011, v. 2, no. 4, pp. 378–415. DOI: 10.5800/GT 2011 2 4 0051 (in Russian).