+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/03.pdf"
first_page="39"
last_page="48"
udc="621.039.746"
title="Problems of radiation safety calculations related to spent fuel transport casks"
original_title="Проблемы расчетного анализа радиационной безопасности контейнеров ОЯТ"
authors=["SobolevAV", "DanilovPA"]
tags=["spent fuel transfer cask", "radiation safety", "neutron source", "gamma source", "radiation protection calculation"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.03"

+++

The article discusses the stages of calculating the radiation safety of spent fuel transport casks, in particular, transport packages and some associated problems. The problem of describing the source of neutrons and gamma radiation of spent nuclear fuel is shown. For individual designs of fuel assemblies, data are given on isotopes that make the main contribution to the neutron source as well as on gamma rays in nuclear fuel material and structural materials. The authors emphasize the necessity of analyzing the influence of the spent fuel initial parameters on the formation of the radiation spectrum and, therefore, on the radiation situation around the transport casks. Attention is paid to the problem of assessing the attenuation of gamma radiation in calculating protection analytically and using software. Due to the ambiguity of the position of the zone with the highest effective dose value on the spent fuel transport cask surface, it is indicated that preliminary estimates are required to take into account all radiation sources and their nonuniformities.

All the problems presented in the article are currently being solved by means of rather complex and voluminous calculations that take a long time. In order to be able to conduct a preliminary assessment of the radiation situation around the spent fuel transport package, the authors propose to create a methodology that will determine the type of interrelations between the maximum effective dose and input parameters, such as fuel burnup, storage, fuel composition, protection material in the spent fuel transport cask, etc. This methodology will make it possible to improve the efficiency of the process of designing the spent fuel transport casks, avoid possible design errors and, in particular, when used as intended, resolve the issue of the spent fuel cask loading configuration.

### References

1. PBYA-06-09-2016. Basic nuclear safety rules for the production, use, processing, storage and transportation of nuclear fissionable materials Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293746/ 4293746881.pdf (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
2. GOST 25461-82. Transport packing kits with for spent fuel assemblies of nuclear reactors. Requirements for methods of calculating nuclear safety Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data/77/ 7743.pdf (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
3. GOST 26013-83. Transport packing kits for spent fuel assemblies of nuclear reactors. General technical requirements Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Index2/1/4294828/4294828423.htm (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
4. PBYA-06-00-96. Basic industry nuclear safety rules for the use, processing, storage and transportation of nuclear hazardous fissile materials Available at: https://meganorm.ru/ Data2/1/4293842/ 4293842541.htm (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
5. GOST R51964-2002. The packaging of spent nuclear fuel. Types and basic parameters Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data/61/6109.pdf (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
6. NP-053-16. Federal norms and rules in the field of the use of atomic energy «Safety rules for the transport of radioactive materials». Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293748/ 4293748284.htm (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
7. NRB-99/2009. Radiation safety standards Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data1/56/56325/index.htm (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
8. OSPORB-99/2010. Basic sanitary rules for radiation safety Available at: https://meganorm.ru/ Data2/1/4293816/4293816468.htm (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
9. IAEA SSR-6. Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material. 2012 Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/P1570r_web.pdf (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
10. Gus’kov V.D., Amelin A.M., Vorontsov V.V., Kapustkina O.O. Hodasevich K.B., Zajtsev B.I., Sivkov A.N. Patent RF No. 2459295. Transport packaging for spent fuel assemblies of nuclear reactors. Patent Rossii 2012, no. 2459295, вull. no. 23 (in Russian).
11. Amelin A.M., Grunin V.V., Gus’kov V.D., Dolbenkov V.G., Zajtsev B.I., Sivkov A.N., Hodasevich K. B. Patent RF No. 2400843. Transporting packaging for transporting and storage spent nuclear fuel. Patent Rossii 2010, no. 2400843, bull. no. 23 (in Russian).
12. Vorontsov V.V., Gus’kov V.D., Zajtsev B.I., Hodasevich K.B. Patent RF No. 2324241. Container for transporting and/or storing spent nuclear fuel. Patent Rossii 2008, no. 2324241, bull. no. 13 (in Russian).
13. Amelin A.M., Vorontsov V.V., Gus’kov V.D., Dolbenkov V.G., Zajtsev B.I., Korotkov G.V.,Sivkov A.N., Hodasevich K.B. Patent RF No. 2465662. Container for transporting and/or storing spent nuclear fuel. Patent Rossii 2012, no. 2465662, bull. no. 30 (in Russian).
14. Vasil’ev A.S., Romanov A.V., Schukin P.O. Strategic pathways of creating environmentally friendly transport packaging kits for transporting and storing spent nuclear fuel. Inzhenernyj Vestnik Dona. Elektronnyj Nauchnyj Zhurnal. Available at: http://www.ivdon.ru/magazine/archive/n3y2012/910 (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
15. Opalovskij V.A. Development of Computational Method for Modeling the Radiation Characteristics of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel. Avtoreferat diss. kand. tehn. nauk. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2007, 20 p. (in Russian).
16. GOST 5632-72. High-alloy steels and corrosion-resistant, heat-resistant alloys. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data/421/42169.pdf (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
17. GOST 5632-2014. Alloyed stainless steels and corrosion-resistant, heat-resistant alloys. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data/581/58175.pdf (accessed June 17, 2019) (in Russian).
18. Gusev N.G. Ionizing Radiation Protection. Vol. 1. Physical Basics of Radiation Protection. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 512 p. (in Russian).
19. Mashkovich V.P., Kudryavtseva A.V. Ionizing Radiation Protection: Reference Book. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1995, 496 p. (in Russian)
20. Opalovskij V.A., Tihomirov G.V., Kryuchkov E.F. Method of calculating the radiation situation around a container with irradiated nuclear fuel. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2004, no. 4, pp. 63-69 (in Russian).