+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/04.pdf"
first_page="49"
last_page="57"
udc="621.039.54(04)"
title="Reactor with metallic fuel and lead-208 coolant"
original_title="Реактор с металлическим топливом и теплоносителем из расплава свинца-208"
authors=["KhorasanovGL", "BlokhinAI"]
tags=["fast reactor of small capacity", "metallic Pu-Am-Np-Zr fuel", "lead-208 coolant", "incineration of low fissile isotopes", "hard neutron spectrum"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.04"

+++

This time, several projects dedicated to fast reactors (FRs) with lead and lead-bismuth coolants, BREST-OD-300, SVBR-100, RBETS-M, BRUTS are proposed in Russia. They will have several valuable consuming properties: chemical inertness, low neutron absorption, low activation and others. Usage of lead coolant leads also to the possibility of achieving a hard-enough neutron spectrum that allows increasing the incineration probability of 241Am, 237Np and other low fissile actinides. High power FRs have large-sized cores that limits the value of neutron energy by the value of 0.5 MeV, which is insufficient for incineration of above mentioned actinides. Small and medium power reactors have smaller cores and, respectively, have harder neutron spectra. Usage of lead and low moderating innovative fuel allow further increasing neutron energy to the value inquired for low fissile actinides incineration.

In the paper a possibility of obtaining a neutron spectrum with the average value of neutron energy higher than 0.5 MeV is considered. It is performed in the frame of the project of BRUTS series reactors, i.e. small power LFRs proposed in the Obninsk Institute for Nuclear Power Engineering.

A scope for achieving a hard neutron spectrum in the reactor BRUTS-25 core of small sizes, D×H ≈ 0,50×0,42 m2, is shown. Findings are that in the core fueled with Pu-Am-Np-Zr alloy and cooled with lead, 208Pb, the average value of neutron energy, 〈En〉, is high-enough, about 0.95 MeV, as well as the share of fast neutron, En > 0.8 MeV, in the neutron spectrum is very high, about 40%. In such of conditions, 241Am and 237Np incineration probabilities in the core center are higher than 50% and values of their one-group fission cross sections are higher than 0.7 barn. This circumstance allows transmuting about 15wt% of low fissile isotopes for one campaign of BRUTS-25. The presence of 241Am in the fuel, in a quantity of 28.7 kg, allows transmuting about 4 kg of its mass for one reactor campaign that lasts about 3 years (1000 effective days). It means that to incinerate the quantity of 241Am produced by the VVER-1000 for one year, equal to25.75 kg, it will be needed 6 BRUTS-25 type low power reactors operating for about 1000 effective days.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.H., Lopatkin A.V., Muratov V.G., Orlov V.V. Achieving radiation equivalence for radioactive waste of nuclear power engineering. Atomnaya Energiya. 1996, v. 81, no. 6, pp. 403-409 (in Russian).
2. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.H., Lopatkin A.V., Muratov V.G., Orlov V.V. Transmutation fuel cycle in a large scale nuclear power in Russia. Moscow: NIKIET Publ. 1999, 273 p.(in Russian).
3. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Apse V.A., Glebov V.B., Tsurikov D.F., Morozov A.G. Radiowaste transmutation in nuclear reactors. IAEA(TECHDOC(693, IAEA 1993, pp. 77-86.
4. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Neutron spectrum hardening in critical and subcritical reactors cooled with 208Pb. Proc. of the II(nd Int. Workshop «Technology and Components of Accelerator(driven Systems». NEA/NSC/DOC (2015) 7, 2015, pp. 65-69.
5. Khorasanov Georgy and Blokhin Anatoly. Neutron spectrum hardening in critical and subcritical rectors cooled with lead-208. Proc of the IV(th Conference «Heavy liquid metal coolants in nuclear technologies». Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2014, v. 2, pp. 503-508.
6. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Neutron spectrum hardening at critical and subcritical reactors in enriching a lead coolant with isotope 208Pb. Perspektivnye materialy (special issue). 2013, pp. 444-448 (in Russian).
7. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Incineration of minor actinides in hard neutron spectra. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 3, pp. 96-103 (in Russian).
8. Khorasanov G.L., Ed. Application of Stable Lead Isotope Pb(208 in Nuclear Power Engineering and Its Acquisition Techniques. New-York. Nova Publishers, 2013, 184 p.
9. Khorasanov Georgy and Blokhin Anatoly. Concerning Am-241 Incineration in the Nuclear Power Installations. Transactions of the American Nuclear Society. 2014, v. 111, no. 2, pp. 1329-1330.
10. Khorasanov Georgy. Isotopic Tailored Lead Coolant with New Consuming Properties for Fast Reactors. Transactions of the American Nuclear Society. 2015, v. 112, no. 1, pp. 803-804.
11. Khorasanov G, Zemskov E and Blokhin A. Concerning advantages in using 208Pb as such a FR coolant. Journal of Physics Conference Series, 781(1): 012005 January 2017.
12. Alekseev P.N., Mikityuk K.O., Vasil’ev A.V., Fomichenko P.A., Schepetina T.L., Subbotin S.A. Optimization of conceptual decisions for the lead-bismuth cooled fast reactor RBETS-M. Atomnaya Energiya. 2004, v. 97, no. 2, pp. 115-125 (in Russian). Available at: http://www.iaea.org/NuclearPower /SMR/crpi2501/html/ (accessed 16 Jul, 2019).
13. Vaganov I.V., Gadjiev G.I., Kosulin N.S., Syuzev V.N. Results of postirradiation examinations of FA UPTS-1 with metallic U-Pu-Zr fuel. Proc. of the VI(th Russian Conf. on reactor material science. Dimitrovgrad. NIIAR Publ., 2000. Volume 2 (in Russian).
14. Harp J., Capriotti L., Chichester H.J.M. Preliminary Postirradiation Examination Comparison between AFC-1 and FUTURIX-FTA. Proc. of the XIV(th Information Exchange Meeting on Actinide and Fission Products Partitioning and Transmutation (14IEMPT). OECD NEA, 2017.
15. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Some macroscopic characteristics of fast reactors of intermediate capacity. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 18-22 (in Russian).
16. Samokhin D.S., Khorasanov G.L., Tormyshev I.V., Zemskov E.A., Gostev A.L. Terehova A.M., Kuz’michyov S.A. Small power lead fast reactor for purposes of education. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 3, pp. 135-141 (in Russian).
17. Khorasanov G.L., Samokhin D.S., Zevyakin A.S., Zemskov E.A., Blokhin A.I. Small power lead fast reactor with metallic fuel. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika 2018, no. 1, pp. 33-40 (in Russian).
18. Khorasanov G.L., Samokhin D.S., Zevyakin A.S. 241Am incineration probability in lead fast reactors. Proc. of the Int. Conf. «Ecological, Industrial and Energetical Safety(2017», 11(15 September 2017, Sevastopol’. Sevastopol’. SevGU Publ., 2017, pp.1467-1471 (in Russian).
19. Khorasanov G.L., Samokhin D.S. A concept of BRUTS series reactors. Proc. of the II(nd Int. Conf. of young scientists, specialists, postgraduates and students «Innovative nuclear reactors of small and ultra(small power», May 15(17, 2017, Obninsk. Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2017, pp. 19-21 (in Russian).
20. Briesmeister J.F. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N(Particle Transport Code, Version 4B. LA-12625-M, Los Alamos National Laboratory, March 1997.
21. Blokhin D.A., Mitenkova E.F., Blokhin A.I. Preparation of complete nuclear library data based on the ENDF/B-VII.0, JEFF-3.1.1, JENDL-4 files of estimated data. Preprint IBRAE, no. 2011-08, Moscow, 2011, 58 p.
22. Gulevich A.V., Zemskov E.A., Komlev O.G., Ponomaryov L.I. Accelerator-blanket system as an incinerator of Np, Am, Cm in various scenario of closing nuclear fuel cycle. Atomnaya energiya. 2013, v. 115, no. 3, pp. 123-132 (in Russian).
23. Haas Didier, Garbil Roger, Hugon Michel. The European activity on ADS. The EURATOM Research Framework Programme. Proc. of the II(nd Int. Workshop «Technology and Components of Accelerator(driven Systems». NEA/NSC/DOC(2015)7, 2015, pp. 25-39.
24. Kazansky Yu.A., Romanov M.I. Transmuting minor actinides with thermal reactor neutrons. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 140-148 (in Russian).
25. Kazansky Yu.A., Ivanov N.V., Romanov M.I. The results of the transmuting minor actinides with thermal and fast reactors neutrons. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 77-86 (in Russian).