+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/05.pdf"
first_page="58"
last_page="70"
udc="621.039.51.17"
title="Consideration of heterogeneous effects in preparing multigroup neutron constants with the CONSYST/ABBN-RF system"
original_title="Учет гетерогенных эффектов при подготовке многогрупповых нейтронных констант в системе CONSYST/БНАБ-РФ"
authors=["AndrianovaON", "ZherdevGM", "LomakovGB", "ManturovGN", "TeplukhinaES"]
tags=["integral experiments", "BFS", "effective neutron multiplication factor", "uncertainty", "Monte Carlo", "ROSFOND", "BNAB-RF", "spectral indices"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.05"

+++

The need for developing mutually consistent calculation models for precision and engineering neutronic codes is defined by requirements to certification and verification of software and constants used for the neutronic calculations in accordance with the «Provision on Verification and Review of Software in the Field of «Neutron and Physical Calculations» (RB-061-11). The key requirement in RB-061-11 is that there shall be a methodically transparent and reproducible procedure to estimate the methodological and constant components of the calculation uncertainty to be implemented only if mutually consistent calculation models are available. Using an example of a series of measurements carried out on three critical BFS-61 configurations (JSC «SSC RF-IPPE n.a. A.I. Leypunsky»), factors are discussed which need to be taken into account when developing such types of models and the peculiarities of their application for calculating the neutronic characteristics of these BFS assemblies. Improved functional capabilities of updated neutron transport software and constants for the calculation and experimental analysis of the BFS integral experiments (ROSFOND/BNAB-RF, CONSYST and MMK-RF) have been demonstrated, allowing a much shorter time and the smallest possible probability of errors in preparing mutually consistent calculation models, as well as correct estimation of the methodological and constant components of the calculation uncertainty in accordance with RB-061-11. The results of estimating the constant uncertainty caused by group approximation are presented. It has been shown based on an analysis of the obtained results that the divergence in the calculations of the BFS-61 critical assembly configurations in the transition from the ROSFOND evaluated neutron data library to its group version, BNAB-RF, does not exceed 0.3% in criticality (a heterogeneous correction term of 0.2 to 0.8%). The estimated spectral index data bias falls within the limits of the Monte Carlo statistical uncertainty. Based on results of a calculation and experimental analysis for the entire set of measurements performed based on a series of the BFS-61 critical assemblies, the ROSFOND library is the nuclear data library providing minimal discrepancies between calculated and experimental values.

### References

1. RB-061-11.Provision on Verification and Review of Software in the Field of «Neutron and Physical Calculations» Available at: https://files.stroyinf.ru/Index2/1/4293796/4293796222.htm (accessed Apr 28, 2019) (in Russian).
2. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code, Version 5, Volume I: Overview and Theory, LA-UR-03-1987, Los Alamos, US, 2008, 416 p.
3. Gomin E.A, Gurevich M.I., Maiorov L.V. Status of MCU. Programme and Book of Abstracts. Advanced Monte Carlo on Radiation Physics, Particle Transport Simulation and Applications, Monte Carlo 2000, October 23 – 26, 2000. Lisbon, Portugal, 2000, pp. 2003-2004.
4. Blyskavka A.A., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. CONSYST/MMKKKENO Software Package for Calculation of Nuclear Reactors by Monte Carlo Method in Multigroup Approximation with Scattering Indicators in Pn5approach. Preprint FEI-2887. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI Publ., 2001, 28 p. (in Russian).
5. Jerdev G.M., Kislitsyna T.S., Nikolaev M.N. ROCOCO System of Combined Neutron Constants – Current Status and Results of Testing Using Geometrical Module of the MMK Code. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2018, no. 2, pp. 47-57 (in Russian).
6. Zherdev G.M., Kislitsina T.S., Nikolaev M.N., Manturov G.N. MMK-RF Program Complex for Precision Calculations of Neutron and Gamma Fields Using BNAB-RF and ROSFOND Constants. Proc. of the V5th ISTC NIKIET52018, Moscow, 2018, pp. 241-242 (in Russian).
7. Abagyan L.P., Bazazyanc N.O., Bandarenko I.I., Nikolaev M.N. Group Constants for Nuclear Reactors’ Calculating. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1964, 139 p. (in Russian).
8. Nikolaev M.N., Ryazanov B. G., Savos’kin M.M., Tsibulya A.M. Multigroup Approximation in Neutron Transport Theory. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 256 p. (in Russian).
9. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. CONSYST Program for Preparation of Constants. Overview of Application. Preprint FEI-2828. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI, 2000, 48 p. (in Russian).
10. Rozhikhin Y., Semenov M. Tsiboulia A., Matveenko I., Bess J.BFS-61 Assemblies: Critical Experiments of Mixed Plutonium, Depleted Uranium, Graphite and Lead with Different Reflectors, ICSBEP, NEA/NSC/DOC/(95)03/VI, September 2008 Edition.
11. Rozhikhin Y., Semenov M. Tsiboulia A., Matveenko I., Bess J. BFS-61 Assemblies: Experimental Model of Lead-Cooled Fast Reactors with Core of Metal Plutonium-Depleated Uranium Fuel and Different Reflectors. BFS1-LMFR-EXP-002, IPRhEP, NEA/NSC/DOE(2006), 2006 Edition.
12. Andrianova O., Manturov G., Rozhikhin Yu. Application of MCNP nonanalog techniques for calculations of reaction rate measurements at the BFS facilities. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 66-76 (in Russian).
13. Andrianova O.N., Dulin V.A., Mihajlova I.V., Andrianov A.A. Computational and Experimental Analysis of Pu, Np, Am, Cm Reaction Rates on BFS Critical Benches. Atomnaya Energiya. 2017, v. 122, no. 5, pp. 291-298 (in Russian).
14. Andrianova O.N. Methodological Aspects of Evaluating Uncertainties in Reactor Characteristics Due to the Resonance Structure of Nuclear Cross Sections. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty. 2017, iss. 1, pp. 74-86 (in Russian).
15. Koshcheev V.N., Lomakov G.B., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Semenov M.Yu., Tsibulya A.M. Certificate of the Russion Federation 2016612865. Certificate of State Registration of CONSYST5 RF Program for Computer. Applicant and copyright holder: JSC «SSC RF-IPPE» (RU). – No. 2016610022; App. Jan. 11, 2016; Publ. Mar. 11, 2016. Registry of computer programs. 1 p. (in Russian).
16. Manturov G.N., Tsibulya A.M., Nikolaev M.N., Koshcheev V.N., Semenov M.Yu. Certificate of the Russion Federation 2013612298. Certificate of State Registration of CONSYST Program for Computer. Applicant and copyright holder: JSC «SSC RF-IPPE» (RU). – No. 2012661768; App. Dec. 29, .12.2012; Publ. Feb. 21, 2013. Registry of computer programs. – 1 p. (in Russian).
17. ROSFOND – Russian Library of Evaluated Nuclear Data Files. Available at: https://www.ippe.ru/reactors/reactor-constants-datacenter/rosfond-neutron-database (accessed Apr 27, 2019) (in Russian).
18. Koscheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsiboulya A.M. ABBN-RF Group Constants Library for Nuclear Reactor and Shielding Calculations. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 93-101 (in Russian).
19. Andrianova O.N., Golovko Yu.E, Rozhihin E.V., Yakunin A.A. Verification of the ABBN-RF Neutron Constant Library Using Sample Tasks and Specially Selected Benchmark Experiments. Yadernaya Fizika i Inzhiniring. 2012, v. 3, no. 2, pp. 120-126 (in Russian).
20. Usachev L.N., Bobkov Yu.G. Sequential Planning of Integrated Experiments and Effective Method of Fitting Constants, taking into Account the Correction of Errors in the Totality of Microscopic Measurements. Collection «Yadernye konstanty». Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1972, iss. 10, 88 p. (in Russian).