+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/06.pdf"
first_page="71"
last_page="82"
udc="621.039.537"
title="Safety of a fast reactor with a reflector containing a moderator with heavy atomic weight and weak neutron absorption"
original_title="Безопасность быстрого реактора с отражателем, содержащим замедлитель с большим атомным весом и малым поглощением нейтронов"
authors=["KulikovGG", "ShmelevAN", "ApseVA", "KulikovEG"]
tags=["nuclear safety", "reactivity accident", "delayed neutrons", "fast reactor", "radiogenic lead"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.06"

+++

The purpose of the study is to justify the possibility of improving the safety of fast reactors by surrounding their cores with reflectors made of material with special neutron#physical properties.

Such properties of the 208Pb lead isotope as heavy atomic weight, small absorption cross section, and high inelastic scattering threshold lead to some peculiarities in neutron kinetics of the fast reactor with a 208Pb reflector, which can significantly improve the reactor safety.

The reflector will also make it possible to generate additional delayed neutrons, which are characterized by «dead» time. This will increase the resistibility of the fission chain reaction to reactivity jumps and exclude prompt supercriticality. Note that the additional delayed neutrons can be generated by the reactor designers.

The relevance of the study is that the generation of additional delayed neutrons in the reflector will make it possible to reduce the consequences of a reactivity accident even if the reactivity introduced exceeds the effective fraction of delayed neutrons. At the same time, the role of the fraction of delayed neutrons as the maximum permissible reactivity for reactor safety is depreciated.

The scientific novelty of the study is that the problem of the formation of additional neutrons, which in their properties are close to traditional delayed neutrons, has not been posed so far. The authors propose a new method for improving the safety of fast reactors by replenishing the fraction of delayed neutrons due to the time delay of prompt neutrons during their transfer in the reflector.

To implement the considered advantages, the following combination is acceptable: lead enriched by 208Pb is used as a neutron reflector while natural lead or other material (sodium, etc.) is used as a coolant in the reactor core.


### References

1. Bell G.J., Glasstone S. Nuclear reactor theory. Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1970. 494 p.
2. Shmelyov A.N., Koulikov G.G., Glebov V.B., Tsurickov D.F., Morozov A.G., Kuznetsov V.V. On actinides transmutation possibility in fast reactors with various coolants. Nuclear Energy Agency Committee on Reactor Physics of the USA (NEACRP-A-1112), Section B.2.3.
3. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Glebov V.B., Tsurikov D.F., Morozov A.G. Safety of fast reactor-burner of long-lived actinides extracted from radioactive wastes. Atomnaya Energiya. 1992, v. 73, no. 6, pp. 450-454 (in Russian).
4. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Glebov V.B., Tsurikov D.F., Morozov A.G. Safety in a fast burning reactor for long-lived actinides extracted from radioactive wastes. Atomic Energy. 1992, v. 73, no. 6, pp. 963-966.
5. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Apse V.A., Glebov V.B., Tsurikov D.F., Morozov A.G. Radioactive waste transmutation in nuclear reactors. Proc. of the International working group on fast reactors specialists meeting on: «Use of fast reactors for actinide transmutation». Obninsk, IPPE, Russia, Sept. 22-24, 1992. IAEA-TECDOC-693, 1993, pp.77-86.
6. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G., Artisyuk V.V. Radiogenic Lead with Dominant Content of 208Pb: New Coolant and Neutron Moderator for Innovative Nuclear Facilities. Internet Journal of Hindawi Publishing Corporation: Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations, 2011. Article ID 252903, 12 p. Available at: http://www.hindawi.com/journals/stni/2011/252903/ (accessed Feb. 1, 2019).
7. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kryuchkov E.F., Apse V.A., and Kulikov E.G. Application of Radiogenic Lead with Dominant Content of 208Pb for Long Prompt Neutron Lifetime in Fast Reactor. Nuclear Technology. 2013, v. 183, no. 3, pp. 409-426.
8. Isakov A.I., Kazarnovsky M.V., Medvedev Yu.A., Metelkin E.V. Non1Stationary Neutron Slowing1Down (Basic Relationships and Some Applications). Monograph. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1984, 264 p. (in Russian).
9. Bekurtz K., Wirtz K. Neutron Physics. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968, 456 p. (in Russian).
10. Physical Values. Handbook. Ed. Grigoriev I.S., Meylikhov E.Z. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1991, 1232 p. (in Russian).
11. Soppera N., Bossant M., Dupont E. JANIS 4: An Improved Version of the NEA Java-based Nuclear Data Information System. Nuclear Data Sheets. 2014, v. 120, pp. 294-296.
12. Beckman I.N. Nuclear Physics (the Lecture Course). Training manual. Moscow. MGU Publ., 2010, 398 p. (in Russian).
13. Kuz’min A.V. Fundamentals of Neutron Transport Theory (the Laboratorial Practicum). Training manual. Tomsk. TPU Publ., 2007, 192 p. (in Russian).
14. Marchenko L.V., Sergeyev Yu.A. Determination of squared neutron slowing-down length for various materials in 18-group and 26-group approximations. Comparison with experimental results. Bulletin of Nuclear Data Center.Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1969, no. 6, pp. 319-390 (in Russian).
15. Kabanova М.А., Kuz’min A.V. Determination of Fission Neutron Age Up to Indium Resonance in Sodium by Means of Group Method. Proc. of tne National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University Conference. Sect. 4 «Power Engineering, Effectiveness, Reliability, Safety». Tomsk. TPU Publ., 2014, pp. 38-41 (in Russian).
16. Apse V.A., Shmelev A.N. Use of the Computer Code TIME26 in the Training Design of Fast Reactors and Accelerator1Driven Systems. Training manual. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2008, 63 p. (in Russian).
17. Blinkin V.L., Novikov V.M. Molten1Salt Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1978, 112 p. (in Russian).
18. Kobayashi K. Rigorous derivation of nodal equations for coupled reactors. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 1991, v. 18, iss. 1, pp. 13-18.
19. Avery R.L. Coupled fast thermal power breeder. Nuclear Science & Engineering. 1958, v. 3, no. 2, pp. 129-144.
20. Avery R.L. Theory of Coupled Reactors. Proc. of the II Intern. Conf. on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. Geneva, 1958, v. 2, p.182.
21. Avery R.L., Branyan C.E., Brunson G.S., Cohn C.E., Fischer G.F., Hummel H.H., Kato W.V., Kirn F., Meneghetti D., Thalgott F.W., Toppel B.J. Critical Experiment with Power Reactor-Breeder of Coupled Type on Thermal and Fast Neutrons. Proc. of the II Intern. Conf. on Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. Geneva. Selected papers of foreign scientists. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1959, pp. 231-258 (in Russian).
22. Godoy J.M., Godoy M.L., Aronne C.C. Application of Inductively Coupled Plasma Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry for the Determination of Monazite Ages by Lead Isotope Ratios. Journal of Brazilian chemistry society. 2007, v. 18, no. 5, pp. 969-975.
23. Catalog of Isotope Dates for Minerals of Ukrainian Shield. Kiev. Naukova Dumka Publ., 1978, pp. 90-137 (in Russian).
24. JSC «All-Regional Association «IZOTOP». Lead-208. Available at: www.isotop.ru/view/1941/ (accessed Feb. 1, 2019) (in Russian).