+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/07.pdf"
first_page="83"
last_page="94"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Nuclear power plant safety assurance and justification of NPP operational acceptability throughout determination of maintenance parameter instituting"
original_title="Обоснование безопасности и эффективности эксплуатации АЭС при выборе параметров технического обслуживания и ремонта"
authors=["AntonovAV", "ErshovGA", "MorozovaOI"]
tags=["risk", "safety level", "emergency release", "probability", "frequency", "nuclear fuel damage", "technological regulation", "maintenance"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.07"

+++

As well as any other fuel and energy complexes (such as hydroelectric power stations, heat power plants, etc.) nuclear power plants (NPP) are subject to high statutory requirements of its operational acceptability. However, due to NPP operational association with likely far-reaching severe environmental, social, political, material, etc. consequences of potential nuclear and radiation accidents unconditional NPP safety assurance is of primary importance. In common practice of NPP designing and operation, the long-term objective of increasing NPP operational acceptability and the task to guarantee to meet strict requirements of existing federal rules and regulations throughout the entire period of NPP life cycle are considered separately. That leads to not taking into consideration aspects of boosting high NPP operational acceptability when aims of NPP safety assurance are to be fulfilled. And conversely, with the intention of enforcing efficient operational acceptability the obligatory NPP safety level is made on a priori grounds. The reason for the described above situation is insufficiency of methods aimed at comprehensive or even exhaustive estimation of interaction between economic and technological numerous factors the last of which occasionally could have nothing in common. In the article methods for increasing of NPP operational acceptability via selecting optimal strategies of NPP maintenance carrying out are presented. In addition to it the methods applying could also acts as an instrument to contribute to high capacity factor value. A distinctive feature of the proposed methods is that the boosting of NPP operational acceptability is supposed to be put into practice via contemporaneous, simultaneous guarantee of mandatory NPP safety level in any NPP configuration.

### References

1. Murogov V.M. Critical notes: history, state, problems and prospects of nuclear science and technology. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 55-66 (in Russian).
2. Energy Availability Factor. Available at: https://pris.iaea.org/PRIS/WorldStatistics/ThreeYrsEnergyAvailabilityFactor.aspx (accessed May 17, 2019).
3. Kirillov P.L., Pioro I.L. Nuclear power as a basis for future electricity generation. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 2, pp. 5-23.
4. NP-001-97 (PNAE G-01-011-97). General Safety Regulations for Nuclear Power Plants OPB-88/97. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200048646 (accessed May 17, 2019)
(in Russian).
5. NP 001-15. Federal rules and regulations in the field of nuclear energy use «General Safety Assurance Provisions for Nuclear Power Plants». Moscow. FBU NTC YaRB Publ., 2016, 56 p. (in Russian).
6. Gordon B.G. Fukushima Accident’s Lessons. Ecologiya i Promyshlennost’ Rossii. 2014, no. 5, pp. 36-41 (in Russian).
7. Regulatory Oversight of Human and Organizational Factors for Safety of Nuclear Installations. IAEA-TECDOC-1846. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. 2018. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/TE-1846web.pdf (accessed May 17, 2019).
8. Safety Reassessment for Research Reactors in the Light of the Accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. 2014. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1615_web.pdf (accessed May 17, 2019).
9. Kut’kov V.A., Tkachenko V.V., Saakjan S.P. Basic Strategies of Public Protection in a Nuclear Power Plant Beyond-Design Basis Accident. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 4, pp. 5-14 (in Russian).
10. Kut’kov V.A., Tkachenko V.V. Radiological Aspects of Nuclear Power Plant Accidents. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no. 2, pp. 151-161 (in Russian).
11. Terent’ev D. A. Assessment of dimensional distribution of aerosols in emissions of leningrad nuclear power plant. Proc. of the IX All-Russian Scientific and Practical Conference «Sustainable development of territories: theory and practice». 2018, pp. 279-283 (in Russian).
12. Bukrinskij A.M. Deterministic Rulemaking and Probabilistic Orientation. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopastnost’. 2013, no. 1 (67), pp. 3-6 (in Russian).
13. Buharin V.Kh., Ershov G.A., Ermakovich Yu.L., Kalinkin A.A., Kalinkin A.I. Evaluation of NPP Protection Against Common-Cause Failures. Atomnaya Energiya. 2013, no. 6, pp. 315-321 (in Russian).
14. Lankin M.Yu., Miroshnichenko M.I., Hamaza A.A., Sharafutdinov R.B. Some Aspects of Safety Substantiation for Nuclear Power Plants. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopastnost’. Available at: https://www.secnrs.ru/publications/nrszine/1_63_2012/uroki_avarii.php (accessed May 17, 2019) (in Russian).
15. Applications of probabilistic safety assessment (PSA) for nuclear power plants. IAEA-TECDOC-1200. IAEA, Vienna. 2001. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/ublications/PDF/te_1200_prn.pdf (accessed May 17, 2019).
16. Criteria for Diverse Actuation Systems for Nuclear Power Plants. IAEA-TECDOC-1848. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. 2014. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE1848-web.pdf (accessed May 17, 2019).
17. Determining the Quality of Probabilistic Safety Assessment (PSA) for Applications in Nuclear Power Plants. IAEA-TECDOC-1511 IAEA, Vienna, 2006. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/te_1511_web.pdf (accessed May 17,2019).
18. NP-095-15. Main Requirements for Probabilistic Safety Analysis of the Nuclear Power Plant Unit. Available at: https://www.seogan.ru/np-095-15-osnovnie-trebovaniya-k-veroyatnostnomu-analizu-bezopasnosti-bloka-atomnoiy-stancii.html (accessed May 17, 2019) (in Russian).
19. Assessment of Vulnerabilities of Operating Nuclear Power Plants to Extreme External Events. IAEA-TECDOC-1834. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna. 2017. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE1834_web.pdf (accessed May 17, 2019).
20. Ershov G.A., Ermakovich Yu.L., Kozlov M.A., Parfent’ev M.A., Kalinkin A.I., Kalinkin A.A. Validation of the Periodicity of Checks of Nuclear Power Plant Safety Systems Using the Bars System of Programs. Atomnaya Energiya. 2010, no. 2, pp. 67-71 (in Russian).