+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/08.pdf"
first_page="95"
last_page="108"
udc="621.039.515:621.039.516.2:621.039.514.4"
title="Circuit solutions of reactimeters"
original_title="Схемные решения реактиметров"
authors=["YuferovAG"]
tags=["reactimeter", "instrumental function", "circuit design", "variant analysis"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.08"

+++

From the standpoint of the general theory of measuring devices and the theory of digital filters, a numbers of questions are considered of a comparative analysis of possible options for algorithmic and circuit realizations of reactimeters. In terms of transient characteristics and transfer functions, the block diagrams of the linear part of the reactimeter are described, as well as the functional algorithms and numerical implementation. Parallel, straight, canonical, symmetrized, lattice and ladder schemes are considered. The corresponding difference equations are given. These results make it possible to compare possible circuit solutions from the point of view of a number of criteria: the complexity of the elemental composition (the number of integrators, adders, multipliers, delay elements), the number of necessary computing operations, the identifiability of the hardware function of the reacimeter, the coherence of the calculated and measured values, the sensitivity to parameter errors etc. The possibility of considering the equations of the reactimeter as autoregressive, which provides the adaptation of the reactimeter under operating conditions, is shown. To ensure the consistency of the calculated and measured reactivity values, the possibility of using identical algorithms in the main computing unit of the direct and inverse problems of nuclear reactor kinetics is shown. The suggested upper and lower reactivity assessments for the reactimeter’ inclusion moment. The implementation of such assessments in the design of the reactimeter allows to minimize the time for the switchover of the reactimeter to the operating mode. For the construction of ladder and lattice circuits some methodical simplifications were used. The database with the parameters of the instrumental functions of the circuit solutions of the reactimeters is available on a public website. A number of tasks and directions for further research are indicated.

### References

1. Woschni E.-G. Measuring1Dynamics, an Introduction to the Theory of Dynamic Measurements. Leipzig. S. Hirzel Verlag, 1964, 168 p. (in German).
2. Sergienko A.B. Digital Signal Processing. Saint Petrsburg. Piter Publ., 2003, 608 p. (in Russian).
3. Yuferov A.G. Bibliography on the Development of Reactimeters and Methods for Measuring Reactivity in the IPPE. Review GNC RF-FEI-295. Moscow. TsNIIAtominform Publ., 2003, 39 p. (in Russian).
4. Lititsky V.A., Bondarenko V.V., Kupriyanova I.A. Methods and Tools for Measuring the Reactivity of Breeding Media. Part 3. Inversion1Kinetic Methods. Review FEI-153. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1982, 42 p. (in Russian).
5. Ostapenko V.V., Shostak A.Z. Automatic Measurement of Reactivity at the IRT1M Reactor. Report IAE-3956. Moscow. IAE n.a. Kurchatov Publ., 1966, 42 p. (in Russian).
6. Voronin A.A., Ostapenko V.V. Automation of Reactivity Measurements. Preprint IAE-1689. Moscow. IAE n.a. Kurchatov Publ., 1968. 16 p. (in Russian).
7. Vyushin A.N., Volegov V.V. Some issues of using an analog reactimeter for measurements on critical assemblies. Report IAE-3956. Moscow. IAE n.a. Kurchatov Publ., 1969, 30 p. (in Russian).
8. Punch B., Schwiegger E.A. Digital Reactimeter. Kerntechnik, 1975, v. 12, pp. 537-539.
9. Kim A.J. The Design, Construction, and Testing of a Reactimeter. Virginia Polytechnic Institute, 1977. Available at: https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/bitstream/handle/10919/64041/ LD5655.V855_1977.J656.pdf (accessed Jul. 05, 2019).
10. Peterson B.R. Larson H.A. A Practical Power-Reactor Reactivity Meter. Proc. of the Symposium «Nuclear Power Plant Control and Instrumentation 1978», Cannes, 24128 April 1978. Vienna: IAEA, 1978, v. II, pp. 483-500.
11. Sarylov V.N., Resurrection F.F., Gorbunov A.N. Digital reactimeters. Atomnaya tekhnika za rubezhom. 1979, no. 11, pp. 19-24 (in Russian).
12. Aleksakov G.N., Fedorov V.A., Alferov V.P., Lyzhin S.A. Reactimeter. Copyright certificate for the invention no. 1144534, 1985 (in Russian).
13. Calculator of Reactivity and Period of VRP-8. Technical description. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1987, 59 p. (in Russian).
14. Reacimeter CVR-10. Description of the Measurement Instrument Type. Obninsk. IPPE Publ., 2005, 3 p. Available at: http://www.kip-guide.ru/docs/18710-99.pdf (accessed Jul. 05, 2019) (in Russian).
15. Polozov S.A., Sikorin S.N. Digital reactimeter based on microcomputers and CAMAC equipment. Vestnik AN BSSR. Ser. Fiziko1Energeticheskie Nauki, 1987, no. 4, pp. 87-92 (in Russian).
16. Grachev A.V., Kanunnikov V.S., Kulabukhov Yu.S., Matveenko I.P., Milovanov Yu.L., Shipilov E.N., Shokodko A.G. Digital reactimeter for nuclear reactors. Atomnaya Energiya, 1986, v. 61, iss. 2, pp. 110-113 (in Russian).
17. Aksenov V. A., Anashin A. M., Gribakin S. N., Dikarev V. S., Krylatykh E. I., Karasev I. B., Meshkov V. K., Nikiforov B. N., Yu. L. Sychinsky, V. Ye. Shermakov. Wide-range Reactimeter for Research Reactors and Critical Stands. Atomnaya energiya, 1990, v. 69, iss. 3, pp. 150-153 (in Russian).
18. Volkov Yu.V., Petrosov T.G., Klinov D.A., Ukraintsev V.F., Slekenitchs Ya.V., Moniri M. Tests of digital reactimeter with 15 groups of delayed neutrons in experiments on ZPR. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1999, no. 4, pp. 38-47 (in Russian).
19. Rolls-Royce reactivity-meter-tcm92-50341. Technical characteristics. Rolls-Royce, 2010. 2 p.
20. Lititsky V.A., Zhukov A.M. A device for measuring the reactivity of a nuclear reactor. Patent RF, no. 2474891, 2013 (in Russian).
21. Voronin A.A., Sivokon V.P., Shikalov V.F. Development of a model of a nuclear reactor for measuring reactivity. VANT. Ser. Fizika i Tekhnika Yadernyh Reaktorov, 1985, iss. 5, pp. 78-80 (in Russian).
22. Sivokon V.P., Poznyakov V.V. Features of the neutron kinetics of a reactor with an uneven distribution of fissile isotopes. Atomnaya Energiya, 1990, v. 69, no. 5, pp. 330-332 (in Russian).
23. Reacimeter CVR-11. Description of the Measurement Instrument Type. Available at: http://nd-gsi.ru/grsi/560xx/56541-14.pdf (accessed Jul. 05, 2019) (in Russian).
24. Fadeev A.N., Moiseev I.F. The Method of Setting Digital Reactimeters to the Current State of the Reactor According to the Composition of Fissile Elements of Fuel. Patent RF, no. 2244352, 2005 (in Russian).
25. Yuferov A.G., Ibragimov R.L. Reactimeter as an adaptive digital filter. Atomnaya Energiya, 2005, v. 98, iss. 4, pp. 253-260 (in Russian).
26. Yuferov A.G. To the problem of identification of integral equations of kinetics. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2005, no. 4, pp. 25-34 (in Russian).
27. Keepin G.R. Physics of Nuclear Kinetics. Addison-Wesley Pub. Co, 1965, 435 p.
28. Lanczosh K. Practical Methods of Applied Analysis. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1961, 524 p. (in Russian).
29. Recommendations on the Comparison of Calculated and Measured Reactivity in Justifying the Nuclear Safety of VVER1type Reactor Facilities. Methodical document. Moscow. FGU NTTs YaRB Publ., 2011. 21 p. (in Russian).
30. Yuferov A.G. Quadrature Formulas for Integral Equations of Kinetics and Digital Reactimeters. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2017, no. 2, pp. 93-105 (in Russian).
31. Yuferov A.G. Unification of direct and inverse problems of nuclear reactor kinetics. Preprint GNTs RF-FEI-3165. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2009. 36 p. (in Russian).
32. Koshelev A.S., Kolesov V.F. Names for Reactivity Measurement Units that are Easy to Use. Atomnaya Energiya, 1992, v. 72, iss. 3, pp. 266-267 (in Russian).
33. Yuferov A.G. Noise Identification of the Transient Response of Delayed Neutrons. Atomnaya Energiya, 2012, v. 113, iss. 4, pp. 235-237 (in Russian).
34. Marple S.L. Digital Spectral Analysis and its Applications. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1990, 584 p. (in Russian).
35. Yuferov A.G. Calculation of Reactimeter’s Fractional1Rational Transfer Function. Preprint GNTs RF-FEI-3091. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI Publ., 2007, 35 p. (in Russian).
36. Vinogradov V.N., Guy E.V., Rabotnov N.S. Analytical Approximation of Data in Nuclear and Neutron Physics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 128 p. (in Russian).
37. Hetrick D.L. Dynamics of Nuclear Reactors. The University of Chicago Press, 1971, 542 p.
38. Kuo B.C. Digital Control Systems. N.Y. Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc., 1980, 730 pp.
39. Yuferov A.G. Dispersion Equation of a Reactimeter. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 3, pp. 30-41 (in Russian).