+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/09.pdf"
first_page="109"
last_page="117"
udc="621.039.746"
title="Criticality safety parametric analyses of spent fuel storage pool for VVER-440"
original_title="Параметрический анализ ядерной безопасности бассейна выдержки для ВВЭР-440"
authors=["KaprinayovaK", "FarkashG", "KrishtofovaK", "HausnerP", "SlugenV"]
tags=["conservative approach", "NPP Mochovce", "parametric analyses", "Serpent 2", "spent fuel storage pool (SFSP)", "VVER-440"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.09"

+++

The article is devoted to the parametric analysis of the selected physical quantities that affect the neutron balance in the spent fuel storage facility located at the Mochovce NPP in Slovak Republic, which, due to safety and legislation, has 71 empty positions (without fuel assemblies). The calculation was performed in Serpent 2 code using the nuclear section library ENDF/B-VII. To perform the parametric analyses, a three-dimensional pin-by-pin model of the VVER-440 fuel assembly with a nominal average enrichment of 4.87 wt.% was created. The sensitivity of the multiplication factor to the change of pin pitch, absorption tube pitch, coolant temperature and density, density of fuel and fuel with Gd and weight fraction of boron in absorption steel ATABOR was analyzed. Parametric analysis showed that the multiplication properties of the system are affected by an increase in the pin pitch, an increase in fuel density, a decrease inthe pitch of absorption tubes, a decrease in coolant temperature, and a decrease in the boron content in the absorption tubes. The results obtained are consistent with theory, since most of the parameters considered affect the uranium-water ratio and, therefore, the multiplication coefficient, as expected. The results of parametric analyzes are used as input parameters for the spent nuclear fuel storage pool model for a proposal of an optimization scenario of the spent fuel storage pool by loading absorber parts of the VVER-440 control assemblies after their planned service lifetime in the reactor core. This way, the storage can be fully loaded.

### References

1. Farkash G., Krishtofova K., Petrishka M., Kaprinayova K. and Hausner P. Optimization of Fuel Assemblies Storage in SFSP NPP12 Mochovce. Technical Report to Sub-task 1.1.1 rev. 02 Research contracts «Research of increasing the safety of NPP in Slovakia». Bratislava. STU FEI UJFI Publ., 2019. 61 p. (in Slovak).
2. Pre-operational Safety Report for NPP12 Mochovce with Gd 4.87- Fuel. Chapter 4. Reactor, Rev. 1, Mochovce NPP12. Plzen. Shkoda Concern Publ., 2011. 200 p. (in Slovak).
3. Decree of the UJD SR no. 30/2012 Coll. as amended by Decree no. 101/2016 Coll. Laying Down Details of Requirements for the Handling of Nuclear Materials, Nuclear Waste and Spent Nuclear Fuel. Bratislava. Nuclear Regulatory Authority, 2016. 13 p. (in Slovak).
4. Mochovce Nuclear Power Plant 440 MW Unit No 2. Implementation project, PCB 1.02.03. – Spent Fuel Storage Facility. Compacting the Spent Fuel Storage Pool. Technical Report. Plzen. Shkoda Concern Publ., 1991. 18 p. (in Slovak).
5. Technological Regulation TR/1036. Spent Fuel Storage and Transport Facility. NPP Mochovce Publ., 2009. 19 p. (in Slovak).
6. Slugen V., Bozik M., Miklosh M., Zemek M., Hatala B. and Farkash G. Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Bratislava. Didaktis Publ., 2014. 178 p. (in Slovak).
7. NPP Mochovce Operating Instructions. Nuclear Safety Rules for Fuel Handling. Plzen. Shkoda Concern Publ., 1991. 72 p. (in Slovak).
8. Hegyi G., Hordoshy G., Maraczy C., Panka I., Pataki I. Subcriticality Analysis of the Slim Fuel Assemblies at Paksh NPP. Presented at the AER Working Group E. Modra, 2017. 22 p.
9. Leppaanen J., Pusa M., Viitanen T., Valtavirta V., Kaltiaisenaho T. The Serpent Monte Carlo Code: Status, Development and Applications in 2013. Ann. Nucl. Energy. 2015, v. 82, pp. 142-150.
10. Leppaanen J. Development of a New Monte Carlo Reactor Physics Code. Finland. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Publ., 2007. 241 p.
11. Chadwick M.B., Herman M., Oblozhinsky P. ENDF/B-VII.1 Nuclear Data for Science and Technology: Cross Sections, Covariances, Fission Product Yields and Decay Data. Nuclear Data Sheets. 2011, v. 112, no. 12, pp. 2887-2996.
12. ENDF Library – Evaluated Data Libraries including ENDF/B-VII.0. 2011. Ordered from IAEA. Available at: http://www-nds.iaea.org/cd-catalog.html/ (accessed Aug 15, 2019).
13. Mosteller R.D. ENDF/B-VII.0, ENDF/B-VI, JEFF-3.1, and JENDL-3.3 Results for the MCNP Criticality Validation Suite and Other Criticality Benchmarks. Proc. of the Intern. Conf. on Reactor Physics, Nuclear Power «A Sustainable Resource (PHYSOR 2008)». Interlaken, Switzerland, 2008. 5 p.
14. Pre-operational Safety Report for NPP Mochovce U213-TI-1768. Revision 1 – Appendix no. 3, Unit 1 and 2. Moscow. Federal Agency for Atomic Energy, Federal State Unitary Enterprise OKB «GIDROPRESS», Federal State Institution Scientific Center «Kurchatov Institute», 2005. 27 p. (in Slovak).
15. Technical specification Shkoda Ae 1838 F. Stainless steel austenitic steel sheets with a boron content of 1.05 to 1.2- for welded pipes in compact storages. Plzen. Shkoda Concern Publ., 1991. 20 p. (in Slovak).
16. Chemical Composition of ATABOR Steel, KP 805 4622/90. Bratislava. Institute of Nuclear and Physical Engineering Publ., 1990. 1 p. (in Slovak).
17. Brzhezina M. et al. Verification of the Absorption Properties of Stainless Steel Containing 10B. Research report 360/34/2014. Jaslovske Bohunice. VUJE Trnava, 2014. 66 p. (in Slovak).
18. X-5 Monte Carlo Team. 2003b, MCNP – A General N#Particle Transport Code, Ver. 5 – Volume II: User’s Guide. LA#CP#03#0245. Los Alamos. LANL, 24-Apr-2003.
19. X-5 Monte Carlo Team. 2003a, MCNP – A General N#Particle Transport Code, Ver. 5 – Volume I: Overview and Theory. LA#UR#03#1987. Los Alamos. LANL, 24-Apr-2003.
20. X-5 Monte Carlo Team. 2003c., MCNP – A General N#Particle Transport Code, Ver. 5 – Volume III: Developer’s Guide. LA#CP#03#0284. Los Alamos. LANL, 24-Apr-2003.