+++

categories="article"
date="2019-12-05T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2019-04"
issue_name="2019 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/04/10.pdf"
first_page="118"
last_page="129"
udc="539.1.09"
title="A study into the structure and physical properties of the Cr18Ni9-grade steel following long-term irradiation as part of the BN-600 reactor internals"
original_title="Исследование структуры и физических свойств стали Х18Н9 после длительного облучения в составе внутрикорпусных устройств реактора БН-600"
authors=["PortnykhIA", "KozlovAV", "PanchenkoVL", "ShikhalevVS"]
tags=["internals", "austenitic steel", "neutron irradiation", "porosity characteristics", "irradiation-induced swelling", "elasticity characteristics"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.10"

+++

The microstructures and physical properties of the austenitic Cr18Ni9-grade steel after 22 and 33 years of operation as part of the reactor internals were tested to assess the state of the BN-600 reactor unchangeable components (internals) and to use these further to predict the reactor ultimate life. The paper presents block diagrams of the porosity distribution, depending on the pore size, in samples from portions that were subjected to neutron irradiation with displacement rates of 1.0⋅10–9 to 4.3⋅10–8 dpa/s at temperatures of 370 to 440°C. The elasticity characteristics were measured on samples taken from such portions using a resonance ultrasonic-type test. The swelling calculated from the block diagrams of the porosity distribution depending on the pore size has been shown to have the maximum value at ~ 415°C and to reach values of ~ 3% after 33 years of irradiation. Long-term variations of Young’s modulus have a non-monotonous dependence on damaging dose. The maximum relative variation of Young’s modulus after 22 and 33 years of operation does not exceed respectively 2% and 6% of the initial state values. Apart from the irradiation-induced swelling, the changes in the physical properties in the process of irradiation were shown to be also affected by other structural changes, specifically by the secondary phase formation. As shown by the results of the studies, the BN-600 reactor internals of the Cr18Ni9-grade steel can be operated beyond 33 years of service. The comparison of the results obtained for the material after 22 and 33 years of operation contain information required to describe further changes in the structure and properties of the Cr18Ni9 internals. The available results can be used to predict the reactor ultimate life as part of both existing and developed models

### References

1. Kursevich I.P., Karzov G.P., Margolin B.Z., Sorokin A.A., Teplukhina I.V. Alloying principles for new radiation-resistant austenitic steel for VVER-1200 in-vessel internals to provide safe operation during at least 60 years. Voprosy Materialovedeniya. 2012, no. 3(71), pp. 146-154 (in Russian).
2. Margolin B.Z., Kursevich I.P., Sorokin A.A., Lapin A.N., Kokhanov V.I., Neustroev V.S. Radiation-induced swelling and radiation embrittlement of austenitic steels. Part I. Experimental Results. Voprosy Materialovedeniya. 2009, no. 2 (58), pp. 89-98 (in Russian).
3. Kozlov A.V., Shcherbakov E. N., Yagovitin P. I., Evseev M. V., Kinev E. A., Panchenko V. L., Isobe I., Sagisaka M., Okita Т., Sekimura N., Garner F.А.Influence of damage rate on swelling and physical-mechanical properties of 18Cr-9Ni austenitic steel in the range of 3⋅10–9 to 4⋅10–8 dpa/s. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2009, v. 386-388, pp. 153-156.
4. Portnykh I.A., Panchenko V.L. Characteristics of radiation-induced porosity and structural-phase state of 07С-16Cr-19Ni-2Mo-2Mn-Ti-Si-V-P-B reactor austenitic steel after neutron irradiation at temperatures 440-600°С up to damage doses 36-94 dpa. Fizika Metallov i Metallovedenie. 2016, v. 117, no. 6, pp. 632- 644 (in Russian).
5. Preliminary post-irradiation examination and dismantling of the simulation package OK-505, assembly 71 B No. 2 / Technical Certificate of the Beloyarsk NPP, Affiliate of Rosenergoatom JSC, No. 21-4/5-1195 dated 27.12.2016 (in Russian).
6. Operating conditions and results of the preliminary examination of the simulation package, assembly 71 B / Technical Certificate of the Beloyarsk NPP, Affiliate of Rosenergoatom JSC, No. 213205 dated 20.02.2015 (in Russian).
7. Portnykh I.A., Kozlov A.V. Methodology of the quantitative analysis of radiation-induced porosity in metals. VANT. Ser.: Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2002, iss. 1 (59), pp. 41-54 (in Russian).
8. Kozlov A.V., Portnykh I.A. Correlation between radiation-induced swelling rate and growth and coalescence of radiation voids. VANT. Ser.: Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2008, iss. 2 (71), pp. 3-13 (in Russian).
9. Kozlov A.V., Shcherbakov E.N., Korostin O.S., Shikhalev V.S., Asiptsov O.I. Mechanisms of the effect of high-dose irradiation on physical and mechanical properties of austenitic steels. VANT. Ser.: Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2004, iss. 2 (63), pp. 283-290 (in Russian).
10. Balachov Iouri I., Shcherbakov E.N., Kozlov A.V., Portnikh I.A., Garner, F.A. Influence of radiation-induced voids and bubbles on physical properties of austenitic structural alloys. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2004, v. 329-333, pp. 617-620.
11. Kozlov A.V., Shcherbakov E.N., Averin S.A., and Garner F.A. The Effect of Void Swelling on Electrical Resistance and Elastic Moduli in Austenitic Steels, Effects of Radiation on Materials. Proc. of the XXIth International Symposium, ASTM STP1447, ASTM International. West Conshohocken, PA, 2004, pp. 66-77.
12. Mosin A.M., Shcherbakov E.N., Panchenko V.L. The effect of deformation and radiation on changes in the structure and physical properties of 18Cr-10Ni-Ti and 18Cr-9Ni austenitic steels. Fundamental’nye Problemy Sovremennogo Materialovedeniya. 2008, v. 5, no. 3, pp. 99-104 (in Russian).
13. Povstyanko A.V., Bulanova T.M., Fedoseeva A.E. et al. Mechanical properties and structure of Cr12-Ni18-Ti10 steel after long-term irradiation in BOR-60 reactor up to maximum damage dose of 108 dpa. Proc. of the VIIth Russian Conference on Reactor Irradiation. Dimitrovgrad. GNTs RF NIIAR Publ., 2004, v. 3, part 2, pp. 134-150 (in Russian).
14. Ershova O.V., Shcherbakov E.N., Yagovitin P.I., Evseev M.V., Shikhalev V.S. Correlation between changes in physical and mechanical properties and swelling of ChS-68 austenitic steel at high-dose neutron irradiation. Fizika Metallov i Metallovedenie. 2008, v. 106, no. 6, pp. 644-649 (in Russian).
15. Margolin B., Sorokin A., Kursevich I., Neustroev V. FCC to BCC phase transformation in austenitic steels for WWER internals with significant swelling. Proc. of the VIIth International Symposium «Contribution of materials investigations to improve the safety and performance of LWRs». France, Avignon, 26 – 30 September 2010.
16. Lifshitz B.G., Karposhin V.S., Linetsky Ya.L. Physical Properties of Metals and Alloys. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1980, 276 p. (in Russian).
17. Neimark B.E. Physical Properties of Steels and Alloys used in Energy. Guide book. Moscow-Leningrad. Energiya, 1967. 240 p. (in Russian).
18. Poplavsky V.M. Guide Book on Properties of Materials for Advanced Reactor Technologies. Vol. 5. Properties of Reactor Steels and Alloys. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2014, 584 p. (in Russian).