+++

categories="article"
date="2016-12-25T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file="pdf/2016/04/2016-04-article-05.pdf"
first_page="44"
last_page="54"
udc="621.311.25"
title="Experience of carrying out comprehensive measurements using heterogeneous systems at various stages of the VVER-1200 power unit commissioning for operation"
original_title="Опыт проведения комплексных измерений с использованием разнородных систем на различных этапах пуска энергоблока ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["PavelkoVI", "SlepovMT", "KhayretdinovVU"]
tags=["commissioning", "vibration control", "VVER-1200", "technical diagnostics system", "vibration control system", "commissioning measurement", "portable analyzer", "acoustic standing waves", "natural frequencies", "the coherence function", "phase", "oscillation of pendulum type"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.05"

+++

The main feature distinguishing commissioning as refers to nuclear power plants in
Russia and Russian projects implemented abroad is the large number of measurements
conducted during different phases of commissioning which is in contrast to the foreign
experience where professionals focus more on the design rationale, and of fullscale
testing is conducted at a smaller scale during the commissioning. Use of measuring
systems for various purposes during commissioning requires involvement of large
numbers of staff from different organizations, often not coordinating with each other
their efforts aimed at the obtaining information. This results in the unwanted parallelism
(mounting, installation, adjustment) both of measurement channels and of the
information thus obtained, which ultimately serves as one of the sources of its distortion
and results in the substantial increase of the cost of operations. At the same time, most
modern power units are equipped with technical diagnostics systems (TDS) [3, 4, 6, 10]
including in their composition measuring channels for various purposes. In pursuance
with existing practice of TDS commissioning adjustment and startup operation of
diagnostic systems is allowed only when the power unit level reaches 100% which
prevents the TDS use during the phases of startup preparation operations and the unit
power ascension. Distinguishing feature of the present study is the attempt to combine
disparate local systems into a unified information system allowing use of the maximum
number of standard channels simultaneously with dedicated measurement channels
temporarily installed for the commissioning in order to obtain reliable and quality
information about the status of the power unit.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Usanov A.I. Vibrating diagnostics of VVER. Ed.: A.A. Abagyan. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2004. 344 p. (in Russian).
2. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. Systems diagnosis of VVER. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2010. 391 p. (in Russian).
3. Birger I.A. Technical diagnostics. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1978. 240 p. (in Russian).
4. GOST 20911-89. Technical diagnostics. Terms and definitions. Moscow. Publishing House of Standards, 1990. 13 p. (in Russian).
5. Malyshev R.Y., Khayretdinov V.U. Control Features of thermomechanical loading of reactor plant equipment during commissioning of power unit No. 4 of Kalinin NPP. In Proceedings of Conference «Safety Assurance of NPP with WWER», OKB «Gidropress», Podolsk, May 28 – 31. 2013 (in Russian).
6. Parkhomenko P.P., Soghomonyan E.S. Basics of technical diagnostics. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981. 460 p. (in Russian).
7. Minutes of the Meeting No. 9/04-03-02/24-PR «Diagnostics of mechanical equipment and the reactor installations of nuclear power plants». Moscow. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom», 28.12.2015 (in Russian).
8. Sergienko A.B. Digital signal processing. Saint-Petersburg. Peter Publ., 2003. 604 p. (in Russian).
9. The system of technical diagnostics of the STD RCP-1391 main circulation pump units. Electronic resource. Handbook on measuring instrumentation. Available at http://www.all-pribors.ru/opisanie/56440-14-std-gtsna-1391-60256 (reference date: 05.04.2016) (in Russian).
10. Mozgalevskaya V.A., Parkhomenko P.P., Soghomonyan E.S. Technical diagnostics: Reference book. Vol. 9: Reliability and efficiency in engineering. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1987. 240 p. (in Russian).
11. Ovchinnikov F.Y., Golubev L.I., Dobrynin V.D. The operational modes of VVER. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1988. 359 p. (in Russian).
12. Thie J. Reactor noise. New York, 1963.
13. Advances in safety related diagnostics and early failure detection systems. Report of a technical committee meeting organized by the IAEA and held in Vienna, IAEA-J4-TC698, November 20-24, 1995.
14. Albrecht R., Seifritz W. The information in neutron fluctuations. Nuclear Science and Engineering, 1970, v. 41, pp. 417-420.
15. Thie J.A. Reactor noise monitoring for malfunctions. Reactor Technology, 1971, v. 14, no, 4, pp. 354-365.
16. Seifritz W., Stegemann D. Reactor noise analysis. Atomic Energy Review, 1971, v. 9, no. 1, pp. 129-135.
17. Uhric R.E. Noise analysis in power reactor. Electrical World, 1973, v. 180, no. 11, pp. 44-56.
18. Williams M.M.R. Random Processes in Nuclear Reactors. Pergamon Press. Ltd. Oxford, England. 1974.
19. Saito K. On the theory of power reactor noise (I, II, III). Ann. of Nucl. Sci. and Eng., 1974, v. 1, pp. 3-253.
20. Saito K. Source papers in reactor noise. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 1979, v. 3, pp. 157-168.
21. Bernard P., Brillon A., Carre J.C. Neutron noise measurements of PWR’s. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 1977, v. 1, pp. 333-346.