+++

categories="article"
date="2016-12-25T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="06"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/04/06.pdf"
first_page="55"
last_page="66"
udc="621.039"
title="Software and technical complex for safety substantiation of nuclear legacy facilities"
original_title="Программно-технический комплекс обоснования безопасности объектов ядерного наследия"
authors=["BlokhinPA", "VaneevYuE", "KovalchukVD", "KryuchkovDV", "MeviusVV"]
tags=["nuclear legacy", "simulation analysis", "radioactive waste", "justification of safety", "engineering barriers", "host medium", "radiation transport", "radionuclide migration"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.06"

+++

Problems of determination of the fate of nuclear legacy objects, including, in particular, the options of decommissioning these objects on the basis of detailed substantiation of relevant projects are becoming extremely important in the nearest future. No practices of wide scope solution of such problems have so far been developed in Russia and the first steps in this direction were made within the framework of implementation of the Federal Target Program «Nuclear and radiation safety assurance in 2008 and for the period until 2015». The issues emerging in the substantiation of projects of decommissioning such objects as pertains to the assessment of radiation protection and safety both for public and for personnel significantly differ from those addressed in designing new objects of nuclear technology. This is explained by the critical shortage of information both about the nuclear legacy objects per se, and, as well, about radioactive wastes disposed inside them. Additional difficulties arise because since the time when these objects were created regulatory requirements imposed on objects of such types underwent significant changes. Therefore, development of approaches to the substantiation of nuclear, radiation and environmental safety of such objects represent extremely important problem. OBOYAN software and technical complex combining software and hardware tools and ensuring implementation of analysis and substantiation of safety of NHOs in their current conditions and in long-term perspective was developed in order to solve numerous problems emerging within the framework of this general task. The main components of the complex are the computational modules for simulation of radiation fields, migration of radionuclides, spread of contamination in aqueous and air media, as well as for evaluation of exposure loads and risks for humans. The purpose of the present paper is to describe the structure and functional capabilities of the complex and to provide some examples of its application.

### References

1. Bol’shov L.A., Laverov N.P., Linge I.I., Evstratov E.V., Agapov A.M. Problemy yadernogo naslediya i puti ih resheniya [Solving Nuclear Legacy Challenges] Vol. 1. Moscow. Energopromanalitika Publ., 2012 (in Russian).
2. Bol’shov L.A., Laverov N.P., Linge I.I., Kryukov O.V. Problemy yadernogo naslediya i puti ih resheniya [Solving Nuclear Legacy Challenges] Vol. 2. Moscow. Energopromanalitika Publ., 2013 (in Russian).
3. Bol’shov L.A., Laverov N.P., Linge I.I. Problemy yadernogo naslediya i puti ih resheniya [Solving Nuclear Legacy Challenges] Vol. 3. Moscow. Energopromanalitika Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
4. Abramov А., Dorofeev A., Komarov E.A., Kudryavtsev E.G., Bol’shov L.A., Linge I.I., Abalkina I.L., Biryukov D.V., Vedernikova M.V., Khamaza A.A., Sharafutdinov R.B., Bochkaryov V.V. On the issue of evaluation of nuclear legacy volumes in the nuclear industry and other facilities of peaceful use of nuclear energy in Russia. Yadernaya i radiacionnaya bezopasnost’. 2014, v. 73, no. 3, pp.1-11 (in Russian).
5. Blokhin P.A., Kryuchkov D.V., Utkin S.S., Linge I.I. Software and technical complex for safety substantiation of nuclear legacy facilities. Sb. dokladov III mezhdunarodnoy nauchno-tehnicheskoya konferencii «Innovacionnye proekty i tehnologii yadernoj energetiki» [Software and technical complex for safety substantiation of nuclear legacy facilities. Proceedings of the III International scientific-technical conference «Innovation projects and technologies of nuclear power generation».] Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2014, v. 2, pp. 251-258 (in Russian).
6. Federal Law No. 190-FZ dated July 11, 2011 «On the Management of Radioactive Waste and Amendments to Certain Legal Acts of the Russian Federation» (in Russian).
7. Radiation Safety Norms (NRB-99/2009). SanPin 2.6.1.2523–09. – To replace NRB-99: approved by the Ministry of Health of the RF on July 7, 2009. Put into effect as of September 1, 2009. Moscow, 2009, 61 p. (in Russian).
8. Main Sanitary Regulations for Radiation Safety (OSPORB-99-2010). SP 2.6.1.2612-10: approved by the Chief Sanitary Doctor of the RF. Мoscow. 2010 (in Russian).
9. Policies and Strategies for Radioactive Waste Management, IAEA Nuclear Energy Strategy No. NW-G-1.1, IAEA, Vienna (2009).
10. Fundamental Safety Principles, IAEA, Safety Standards Series No. SF-1, IAEA, Vienna (2006).
11. Predisposal Management of Radioactive Waste, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 5, IAEA, Vienna (2009).
12. Strategy and Methodology for Radioactive Waste Characterization, IAEA,-NECDOC-1537, IAEA, Vienna (2007).
13. Chadwick M.B., Oblozinsky P., Herman M., Greene N.M., McKnight R.D., Smith D.L., Young P.G., MacFarlane R.E., Hale G.M., Frankle S.C., Kahler A.C., Kawano T., Little R.C., Madland D.G., Moller P., Mosteller R.D., Page P.R., Talou P., Trellue H., White M.C., Wilson W.B., Arcilla R., Dunford C.L., Mughabghab S.F., Pritychenko B., Rochman D., Sonzogni A.A., Lubitz C.R., Trumbull T.H., Weinman J.P., Br D.A., Cullen D.E., Heinrichs D.P., McNabb D.P., Derrien H., Dunn M.E., Larson N.M., Leal L.C., Carlson A.D., Block R.C., Briggs J.B., Cheng E.T., Huria H.C., Zerkle M.L., Kozier K.S., Courcelle A., Pronyaev V., and van der Marck S.C. «ENDF/B-VII.0: Next Generation Evaluated Nuclear Data Library for Nuclear Science and Technology», Nuclear Data Sheets, 107, 2931 (2006).: «ENDF/B-VII.0: Next Generation Evaluated Nuclear Data Library for Nuclear Science and Technology», Nucl. Data Sheets, 102, 2931 (2006).
14. Santamarina A. (Ed), Bernard D., Rugama Y. «The JEFF-3.1.1 Nuclear Data Library» JEFF Report 22(2009). Available at: http://www.nea.fr/.
15. Moduli rascheta radiacionnyh poley v sostave programmno-informacionnogo kompleksa PRON [The calculation modules of radiation fields as part of the PRON program-information complex]. Preprint IBRAE RAN № IBRAE-2013-03, 2013, pp.39-42 (in Russian).
16. Special Radioactive Waste / Ed. I.I. Linge. Moscow. SAM Poligrafist Publ., 2015, 240 p. (in Russian).
17. Methodology for determination of radionuclide composition of γ-emitting sources. Attestation Certificate № 43165.15176 / RA.RU.311243 (in Russian).
18. Methodology for identification of the types of neutron radionuclide sources according to the results of measurement of energy distribution of fast neutron flux density. Attestation Certificate № 43165.15177 / RA.RU.311243 (in Russian).
19. Methodology for measurement of distribution coefficients for 90Sr and 22Na radionuclides in the host environment (sorption coefficient). Attestation Certificate number 251-RA.RU.311243-2015 (in Russian).
20. Methodology for measurement of characteristics of compressive strength load-bearing structures by ultrasound method (with graduation for cores, selected from the structures). Attestation Certificate № 241-01.00294-2010 / 2015 (in Russian).