+++

categories="article"
date="2016-12-25T01:18:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="07"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2016/04/07.pdf"
first_page="67"
last_page="77"
udc="621.039.566"
title="The Fukushima-daiichi NPP accident as a stress-test for the national system for public protection in the event of a severe nuclear power plant accident"
original_title="Авария на ас Фукусима-дайити как стресс-тест для национальной системы защиты населения при тяжелой аварии на атомной станции"
authors=["KutkovVA", "TkachenkoVV"]
tags=["radiation emergency", "public protection strategy", "nuclear power plant", "Fukushima-Daiichi accident", "stress test"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.07"

+++

The circumstances of the accident at Fukushima-Daiichi NPP, which began on 11 March 2011 are suggested to be used as the basis for stress tests for the national strategy of public protection in the event of severe beyond design basis accident at the nuclear power plant. Stress testing the public protection strategies is able to show the degree of stability of the national system in case of the most unfavorable events at the NPP and provide an understanding of the possible vulnerabilities and the ways to overcome them. The article provides definition of the «Fukushima» stress-test model and discusses the actions of Japanese authorities undertaken as the reaction to this stress test. Application of the «Fukushima» stress test allowed identifying significant vulnerabilities of the public protection strategy in case of accident at the NPP. The public protection strategy using in Japan for decades passed prior to the Fukushima-Daiichi accident through multiple inspections in the course of more than one hundred field exercises conducted on different levels of response. The main vulnerability of the strategy was the special emphasis made in Japan on the use of computer-based systems for projecting the public emergency exposure in the decision-making during the initial phase of emergency. It is suggested to use the «Fukushima» stress test for identifying the vulnerabilities of the strategy of public protection in case of accident on NPP, which is established in the Russian Federation. The lessons learned from the testing shoul be used for further improvement of the national strategy.

### References

1. Countermeasures for the Great East Japan Earthquake. WARP Web Archiving Project. NISA, Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency of Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). Available at: http://warp.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/3531775/www.nisa.meti.go.jp/english/ (27.12.2015).
2. The Fukushima Daiichi accident. Report by the Director General, Vienna: IAEA, 2015.
3. Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency. General Safety Requirements Part 7: Safety Standard Series No. GSR Part 7. Vienna: IAEA, 2015. 146 p.
4. Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards. General Safety Requirements Part 3, Safety Standard Series No. GSR Part 3, Vienna: IAEA, 2014.
5. Regulations on the declaration of state of emergency, the fast transmission of information and the organization of prompt support to the nuclear power plants in the event of a radiation emergency. [Polozhenie o poryadke obyavleniya avariynoy obstanovki, operativnoy peredachi informatsii i organizatsii ekstrennoy pomoshchi atomnym stantsiyam v sluchae radiatsionno-opasnykh situatsiy] Federal rules and regulations in the field of atomic energy NP-005-16. Moscow. Gosatomnadzor of Russia Publ., 2016 (in Russian).
6. Ostrejkovsky V.A. Operation of nuclear power plants [Ekspluatatsiya atomnykh stantsiy] Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1999 (in Russian).
7. Practical basis for the development and validation of performance and safety of operation of the WWR reactor units [Prakticheskie osnovy razrabotki i obosnovaniya tekhnicheskikh kharakteristik i bezopasnosti ekspluatatsii reaktornykh ustanovok tipa VVER]. Eds. M.V. Kovalchuk, V.A. Sidorenko, Yu.V. Markov. Moscow. NRC «Kurchatov institute» Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
8. Criteria for Use in Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-2, Vienna: IAEA, 2011.
9. Actions to Protect the Public in an Emergency due to Severe Conditions at a Light Water Reactor, Emergency Preparedness and Response Series EPR-NPP PUBLIC PROTECTIVE ACTIONS, Vienna: IAEA, 2013.
10. Kutkov V.A., Tkachenko V.V., Saakian S.P. Basic strategies of public protection in a nuclear power plant beyond-design basis accident. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 4, pp. 5-14 (in Russian).
11. McKenna T., Vilar-Welter P., Callen J., Martincic R., Dodd B., and Kutkov V. Tools forplacing the radiological health hazard in perspective following a severe emergency at a light water reactor (LWR) or its spent fuel pool. Health Physics. 2015, v. 108, pp. 15-31.
12. Derived Intervention Levels for use in NPP emergency [Proizvodnye urovni vmeshatel’stva v sluchae avarii na atomnoy stantsii] Guidance Document MU 2.6.1. 047 -08. Moscow. Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2008 (in Russian).
13. Model action plan for protection of the personnel in the event of a nuclear power plant accident [Tipovoe soderzhanie plana meropriyatiy po zashchite personala v sluchae avarii na atomnoy stantsii] Federal rules and regulations in the field of atomic energy NP-015-12. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2012 (in Russian).
14. Action Plan of Sverdlovsk Oblast for protection of the citizens in the event of emergency at Beloyarsk NPP. [Plan deystviy Sverdlovskoy oblasti po zashchite naseleniya v tridtsatikilometrovoy zone Beloyarskoy atomnoy elektrostantsii] Ekaterinburg, Government of Sverdlovsk Oblast. Ref. No. 1263-PP, 1999 (in Russian). Available at: http://docs.pravo.ru/document/view/4722315/28592015/ (20.04.2015).
15. Emergency Preparedness and Response. The Fukushima Daiichi accident. Technical volume 3/5. Vienna: IAEA, 2015.
16. Infrastructure and methodologies for the justification of nuclear power programmes. Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy No. 28/ Edited by Agustнn Alonso. Oxford: Woodhead Publishing Limited, 2012.
17. The International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale User’s Manual. 2008 Edition, Vienna: IAEA, 2009.
18. Convention on early notification of a nuclear accident and Convention on assistance in the case of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency. IAEA Legal Series No. 14. Vienna: IAEA, 1987.
19. Radiological Consequences. The Fukushima Daiichi accident. Technical volume 4/5. Vienna: IAEA, 2015.
20. Act on Special Measures Concerning Nuclear Emergency Preparedness, Act No. 156 of 1999, as last amended by Act No. 118 of 2006 (Japan). Available at: http://www.cas.go.jp/jp/seisaku/hourei/data/ASMCNEP.pdf (19.06.2016).
21. Description and Context of the Accident. The Fukushima Daiichi accident. Technical Volume 1/5. - Vienna: IAEA, 2015.
22. Nuclear Power Reactors in the World. IAEA Reference data series No. 2. 2011 Edition. Vienna: IAEA, 2011.
23. National Report of Japan for the third Review Meeting of Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste, Government of Japan, 2008.
24. Hirano, M. New Framework for Emergency Preparedness and Response in Japan: International Experts Meeting on Assessment and Prognosis in Response to a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency. 20–24 April 2015. – Vienna: IAEA, 2015. IAEA-CN-256. Available at: http://www-pub.iaea.org/iaeameetings/IEM9p/Opening/Hirano.pdf (29.04.2016).
25. Michio Ishikawa M. A Study of the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Accident Process. What caused the core melt and hydrogen explosion? Tokyo: Springer, 2015.