+++

categories="article"
date="2016-12-25T01:17:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file="pdf/2016/04/2016-04-article-08.pdf"
first_page="78"
last_page="90"
udc="621.039.577:362"
title="V.Ya. Pupko and space nuclear power"
original_title="В.Я. Пупко и космическая ядерная энергетика"
authors=["KukharchukOF", "LinnikVA", "PyshkoAP", "YurievYuS"]
tags=["space nuclear power", "nuclear propulsions", "nuclear installations", "direct conversion of energy", "comparative analysis", "domestic and foreign installations"]
rubric = "historyofscience"
rubric_name = "History of science"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.08"

+++

The Article is prepared and devoted to the 90-th anniversary of Victor Yakovlevich Pupko who initiated development of space nuclear power in Russia.

In the presented Article the certain historic backgrounds for formation and development of Russian space nuclear power are considered, namely: nuclear propulsions (NP), space nuclear power installations (NPI), direct conversion of nuclear energy to the energy of laser emission, photon nuclear propulsion for investigation of distant planets of Solar System and rendezvous missions to the Alpha Centauri star system, annihilation gamma-ray laser. All mentioned subjects were in the sphere of activities of Victor Pupko in the last years of his life.

The role played by Victor Pupko in development of highlighted area of research and science is described. Victor Ya. Pupko was an outstanding scientist, Professor, Doctor of Science in physics and mathematics, State Prize Winner of the USSR, Honored Worker of Science and Engineering. He was awarded the Order of October Revolution, two Orders of the Red Banner of Labor. In 1995 Victor Pupko and Georgy Gryaznov (NPO «Krashaya Zvezda») were recipients of the Schreiber-Spence Achievement Award «For Outstanding Contributions to Space Nuclear Power and Propulsion» (the USA, Los Alamos National Laboratory).

The complicated historical way with peculiar conflicts is studied, experience and results of construction of ten domestic nuclear propulsions and space nuclear power installations with direct conversion of thermal energy to electricity, namely installations BUK and TOPAZ are described. Installations BUK operated in space over twenty years. Two prototypes of installation TOPAZ have passed successful flight tests in space.

The comparative analysis of history of Russian and world experience of development and application of nuclear power for conquest of outer space is presented by examples of power ground-based tests of thermoelectric nuclear power installations (NPI) such as ROMASHKA, SNAP-10A, BUK, thermionic NPIs such as TOPAZ, YENISEI and operating in space NPIs, namely: SNAP-10A, BUK, TOPAZ.

It is highlighted that many experts from different departments of JSC «SSC RF-IPPE» and associate companies took part in development of space nuclear power. Successful space operation of NPIs BUK and TOPAZ was realized first of all due to efforts of scientists and specialists of leading nuclear power enterprises and institutes.

Over a long period the creative scientific activities of Victor Pupko were targeted to the space nuclear power.

Being the Leader of scientific direction on space NPIs over thirty years, Victor Pupko has organized a unique science school on space nuclear power that now is among the leading ones in the world.

As a member of State Commission, Victor Pupko participated in all launchings of space nuclear power installations.

### References

1. Pupko V.Ya. History of IPPE Works on Development and Construction of NPs and Space NPIs. Dijest: 50 Years of IPPE. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1996, pp. 201-211 (in Russian).
2. Pupko V.Ya. History of Works on Nuclear Power Aircrafts for Space and Air Installations in SSC RF-IPPE. Personal memoirs. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2000, 56 p. (in Russian).
3. Pupko V.Ya. Use of Adjoint Equations and Heat Sources Value Functions upon Performance of Researches in Processes of Heat Conduction and Heat Transfer: IPPE Preprint-176. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1969 (in Russian).
4. Gulevich A.V., Zrodnikov A.V., Pupko V.Ya., Shimanski A.A. Use of Perturbation Theory in Engineering Problems of Nuclear Power. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1993, 208 p. (in Russian).
5. Pupko V.Ya. Review of the Properties of Gas Lasers with Conventional Methods of Pumping – part I: IPPE Preprint-1244.Review of Experimental Works on Direct Nuclear Pumping of Gas Laser-Active Media – part II: IPPE Preprint-1245. Energy Deposition of Charged Particles in Gas Lasers with Direct Nuclear Pumping – part III: IPPE Preprint-1246. Methods of Estimation of Characteristics of Gas Lasers with Direct Nuclear Pumping – part IV: IPPE Preprint-1247. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1981 (in Russian).
6. Zrodnikov A.V., Zabudko A.N., Linnik V.A., Dubinin A.A., Ionkin V.I., Yarygin V.I. Space Nuclear Power in Views: 50 Years Ago and Prevision for 50 Years. Report at International Conference «Fifty Years of Nuclear Power». Moscow-Obninsk, 2004, IAEA-CN-114, 40 p. (in Russian).
7. Institute for Physics and Power Engineering: Chronicles of Lives. Edited by A.V. Zrodnikov, Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2006, pp. 215-220 (in Russian).
8. Cosmic Thinker. Selected Works of V.Ya. Pupko. Memoirs. To the 80th Anniversary of V.Ya. Pupko (1927 – 1999). Edited by A.N. Zabudko. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
9. Demyanko Yu.G., Konyukhov G.V., Koroteev A.S. Nuclear Propulsions. Moscow. JSC «Norma-Inform» Publ., 2001. 414 p. (in Russian).
10. Ionkin V.I., Linnik V.A., Maltsev V.G., Portyanoy A.G., Serdun E.N., Sorokin A.P. Contribution of City Obninsk in Kaluga Region to Space Nuclear Power: History, Experience, Results of Activities. 2006. Proc. of Region Competition of Scientific Projects in the Human Sciences. Kaluga, 2007, iss. 8, pp. 326-344 (in Russian).
11. Smetannikov V.P., Ulasevich V.K., Cherepnin Yu.S. (NIKIET), Pavshuk V.A., Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N. (RRC «Kurchatov Institute»), Deniskin V.P., Dyakov E.K., Fedik I.I. (NPO «Luch»), Vasilyev Yu.S., Kolbaenkov A.N., Kolodeshnikov A.A., Pivovarov O.S., Tikhomirov L.N., Tukhvatulin Sh.T. (NNC, Kazakhstan). Reactor IVG.1. Experience and Results of 30-Year Operation. Proc. of Scientific Conf. «Nuclear Power in Space – 2005». Moscow-Podolsk. 2005, v. 1, pp. 7-13 (in Russian).
12. Black D.L., Fahrbach D.H., Watt D.F. Program NERVA: History and Technical Review. Proc. of Int. Conf. «Nuclear Power in Space». Obninsk, USSR. 1990, pp. 283-306 (in Russian).
13. Millionschikov M.D., Gverdtsiteli I.G., Merkin V.N., Ponomarev-Stepnoj N.N. High-Temperature Reactor for Direct Conversion – ROMASHKA. Report No. 873 at Third International Conference on Peaceful Use of Nuclear Power. Geneva, 1964.
14. Development and Testing of Installation SNAP-10A (Abstract). Atomnaya tehnika za rubezhom, 1966, no. 6 (in Russian).
15. Dubinin A.A., Zabudko A.N., Ionkin V.I., Linnik V.A. Review of Scientific-Technical and Project Activities in IPPE Perfomed in 1953 – 1999 for Nuclear Power Installations for Space and Air Systems: IPPE Preprint-0301. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2004. 20 p. (in Russian).
16. Zabudko A.N., Linnik, V.A., Raskach F.P. Comparison and Analysis of Characteristics of Various Type Thermionic Reactors-Converters for Space NPI: IPPE Preprint-3025. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 2004 (in Russian).
17. Bondarenko I.I., Gorelov I.N., Guskov Yu.K., Dmitriev V.M., Kasikov I.I., Karmazin V.P., Lebedev S.Ya., Lebedev M.A., Malyh V.A., Maiev S.A., Pupko V.I., Petrovskiy V.G., Paschenko V.P., Sibir E.E., Stavissky Yu.Ya., Stakhanov I.P., Stepanov A.S., Yuriev Yu.S. Theoretical and Experimental Studies Related to Development of Thermionic Reactors-Converters. Report No. 317 at Third International Conference on Peaceful Use of Nuclear Power. Geneva, 1964.
18. Pupko V.Ya., Malyh V.A., Yuriev Yu.S. The Certain Problems in Development of Thermionic Reactor-Converter. International Conference on Thermionic Electric Power Generation, London, 1965. IPPE Preprint-27. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1965 (in Russian).
19. Pupko V.Ya., Bologov P.M., Vizgalov A.V., Kuptsov G.A., Linnik V.A., Petrovsky V.G., Ruzhnikov V.A. Loop Tests and Testing of Power Generating Channels of Installation TOPAZ in the First NPP Reactor. Branch Jubilee Conference. Obninsk. FEI Publ.,1990 (in Russian).
20. Gryaznov G.M., Pupko V.Ya. Soviet Space NPI TOPAZ-1. Priroda. , 1991, no. 10 (in Russian).
21. Akimov V.N., Gafarov A.A., Koroteev A.S., Prishletsov A.B. Nuclear Power in Space Exploration of the XXI Century. Obscherossijskij nauchno/tehnicheskij zhurnal «Polyot». 2000, no. 10 (in Russian).