+++

categories="article"
date="2016-12-25T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="10"
file="/pdf/2016/04/2016-04-article-10.pdf"
first_page="102"
last_page="113"
udc="544.3.032.7"
title="Thermodynamic oxidation aspects of metallic impurities and steel surfaces in heavy liquid metal melts"
original_title="Термодинамические аспекты процесса окисления металлических примесей и поверхностей сталей в расплавах тяжелых жидких металлов"
authors=["LavrovaOV", "LegkikhAY", "StorozhenkoAN"]
tags=["oxygen", "model", "iron", "oxide", "partial pressure", "impurity", "melt", "solubility", "lead", "lead-bismuth", "steel", "thermodynamic analysis"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.10"

+++

Alternative approach to the analysis of the process of oxidation of metallic impurities and steel surfaces in heavy liquid metal (lead, lead-bismuth) melts is presented. Development of models of the interaction of impurities with the main components of heavy liquid metal melts and with each other as well as the model for simulation of oxidation of structural steels by oxygen dissolved in the melt is a vitally important task solution of which will allow performing the justifiable selection of optimal operating conditions for structural steels in nuclear power plants operated with heavy liquid metal coolants.

It is demonstrated in the present paper that composition and stability of iron-based oxide system in heavy liquid metal melts are determined by the temperature and partial pressure of oxygen in the ambient environment. When any of these parameters changes the oxide phase the composition changes with increasing or decreasing oxygen concentration.

It was suggested to examine transfer of components of steel through the oxide film as the physical model of oxidation of steel, i.e. as the movement of cations forced by electric field the strength of which corresponds to the difference between the electrochemical potentials of the oxide systems under study. In this case the steel matrix acts as the anode, the oxide film is a solid electrolyte, and the moving coolant containing oxygen acts as the cathode. Such analysis allows binding the transition from external conditions of oxidation of steels to internal conditions within the whole comprehensive picture.

### References

1. Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and Technologies, OECD / NEA, 2015. No. 7268.
2. Kireev V.A. Kratkij kurs fizicheskoj khimii. [Concise course on physical chemistry]. Мoscow. Khimiya. Publ., 1978. 640 p. (in Russian).
3. Turkdogan E.E. Fizicheskaja himija vysokotemperaturnyh processov [Physical chemistry of high-temperature processes]. Moscow. Metallurgiya. Publ., 1985. 344 p. (in Russian).
4. Kulikov I.S. Termodinamika oksidov. Spravochnik. [Thermal dynamics of failures. Handbook]. Moscow. Metallurgiya. Publ., 1986. 344 p. (in Russian).
5. Vysokotemperaturnye fiziko-himicheskie processy na granice razdela tverdoe telo – gaz. Sbornik dokladov vsesojuznogo soveshhanija. Zvenigorod. Moscow. Nauka, Publ., 1984.
6. Lavrova O.V., Ivanov K.D., Niyazov S.-A.S., Ashadullin R.Sh., Legkikh A.Ju. Rol vneshney diffuzii pri okislenii konstruktsionnykh staley v TZhMT [The role of external diffusion in the oxidation of structural steels in heavy liquid-metal coolants]. VANT. Seriya: Yaderno- reaktornye konstanty. 2014, no. 1, pp. 69-78. (in Russian).
7. Martynov P.N., Ashadullin R.Sh., Storozhenko A.N., Chernov M.E., Ulyanov V.V., Shelemetiev V.M., Sadovnichiy R.P., Kuzin P.V. Osobennosti metrologicheskoy poverki datchikov aktivnosti kisloroda v zhidkometallicheskikh teplonositelyakh [Specific features of metrological calibration of oxygen activity sensors in liquid metal coolants]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no 3, p. 68 (in Russian).
8. Tretiakov Ju. D. Termodinamika ferritov. [Thermal dynamics of ferrites]. Leningrad. Khimiya Publ., 1967. 305 p. (in Russian).
9. Uhlig H.H., Revie R.W. Corrosion and corrosion control. An Introduction to Corrosion Science and Engineering. Leningrad. Himiya. Publ., 1989. 455 p.
10. Bolshaya Entsiklopediya Nefti i Gaza. [Greater encyclopedia of oil and gas]. Available at: http://www.ngpedia.ru/ (accessed 16 may 2016) (in Russian).
11. Termodinamika vosstanovleniya oksidov zheleza [Thermodynamics reduction of iron oxides]. Available at: http://helpiks.org/3-93906.html (accessed 16 june 2016) (in Russian).
12. Glushko V.P. Termodinamicheskie konstanty individualnykh veshhestv. Spravochnik. [Thermal dynamic constants of separate substances]. Vol. I-IV. Moscow. Nauka. Publ., 1978-1982. 4000 p. (in Russian).
13. Facility for the analysis of chemical thermodynamics. Available at: http://www.crct.polymtl.ca/fact/ (accessed 16 June 2016).
14. Arkharov V.I., Blankova N.B. O strukturnyh kharakteristikakh okaliny, ispol’zuemyh pri issledovanii mehanizma reakcionnoj diffuzii. [On the structural characteristic of hammer scales used during studies of reaction diffusion mechanism]. Fizika metallov i metallovedenie. 1960, v. 9, no. 6, pp. 878-887 (in Russian).