+++

categories="article"
date="2016-12-25T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2016-04"
issue_name="2016 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="13"
file="/pdf/2016/04/2016-04-article-13.pdf"
first_page="133"
last_page="145"
udc="621.039.526.034"
title="Development of the integrated model of MBIR research reactor facility in the simintech simulation environment using the PRISET estimate code"
original_title="Разработка комплексной модели ИЯУ МБИР с использованием среды динамического моделирования simintech и расчетного кода PRISET"
authors=["ParshikovIA", "DolgovYuA", "LarionovIA", "ShchekaturovAM"]
tags=["control systems algorithms", "complex model", "neutron physics processes", "safety analysis", "design", "PRISET calculation code", "SimInTech process systems dynamic modeling environment", "MBIR reactor facility", "thermal hydraulic processes"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.13"

+++

Safety analysis of the reactor facility in the process of design requires the use of not only calculation codes for analyzing processes of different nature but, as well, the use of convenient tools for developing mathematical models of process systems. Simulation tools are expected to support multivariate optimization calculations enabling the designer and (or) the developer to verify the adopted design solutions and to update the design, the composition and the operating parameters of process systems. At the same time, entering any amendments in the design and development documentation shall be accompanied by the analysis of their effects not only on the particular system but also on the reactor facility as the whole. Integrated dynamic model provides for the timely and comprehensive computational verification.

Integrated model of the MBIR sodium liquid metal cooled nuclear research facility was built as part of the present study using the SimInTech dynamic simulation environment and the PRISET one-dimensional coupled neutronics and thermal hydraulics code. The integrated model designed as the engineering tool represents the software implementation of processes of different nature taking place in the reactor facility and includes mathematical models of all safety-related process systems. Also, the SimInTech dynamic simulation environment and the PRISET code were upgraded. The developed user interface, jointly with the model of algorithms, enables integrated calculations for the safety case of the reactor facility. The performed test calculations with the obtained local and integral parameters in transients prove that the integrated model of the MBIR nuclear research facility is serviceable.

The structure of the integrated model’s simulation tools makes it possible to use it as a simulator in the operating personnel training and as an aid for optimizing the man-machine interface in the development of operator panels.

The field of application of the integrated model is not limited by the MBIR facility. It can be used for safety analysis of any pool-type research reactors, pressurized water research reactors, commercial pool-type reactor facilities, as well as liquid metal cooled reactors.

### References

1. Svyatkin M.N., Izhutov A.L., Zhemkov I.Y., Tretiakov I.T., Lopatkin A.V., Poplavsky V.M., Kochetkov L.A., Cherny V.A., Petrov Y.I., Zavadsky M.I., Yamov V.Y., Vasiliev B.A., Shkarin V.I., Trunov N.B., Chaban V.A. Purpose and priority tasks of a Russian multi-function fast research reactor. Kyoto: Book of Extended synopses, FR09, 2009, pp. 115-120.
2. Gabaraev B.A., Lopatkin A.V., Tretiyakov I.T., Khmelshchikov V.V., Aksenov V.L. Research Reactors – Looking into the Future. Atomnaya energiya. 2007, v. 103, iss. 1, pp. 65-70 (in Russian).
3. Dragunov Yu.G., Tretiyakov I.T., Lopatkin A.V., Romanova N.V., Likasevich I.B. Multipurpose Fast Research Reactor (MBIR), and Innovative Tool for the Nuclear Power Technology Evolution. Atomnaya energiya. 2012, v. 113, iss. 1, pp. 25-28 (in Russian).
4. Platonov I.V., Larionov I.A, Dolgov Yu.A. Coupled neutron-physics and thermal hydraulic PRISET-MBIR software package for studies of transients and emergencies and safety analysis. VANT. Ser. Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES. Issledovatelskie reactory. 2013, iss. 33, pp. 59-67 (in Russian).
5. Chirkin V.S. Thermal properties of the materials in the nuclear engineering. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968, 238 p. (in Russian).
6. Kozlov, O.S., Kondakov, D.E., Skvortsov, L.M., Timofeev, K.A., Khodakovsky, V.V. Software for the study of the dynamics and the design of technical systems. Informatsionnye tekhnologii. 2005, no. 9, pp. 20-25 (in Russian).
7. Parshikov I.A., Petukhov V.N., Timofeev K.A., Khodakovsky V.V. SimInTech software for the simulation of complex technical systems. Proceedings of the International scientific-technical conference «Computer modeling 2013». St.Petersburg. SPbGPU Publ., 2013, pp. 82-87 (in Russian).
8. Kolesov Yu.B. Object-oriented modeling of complex dynamical systems. St.Petersburg. SPbGPU Publ., 2004, pp. 10-21 (in Russian).
9. Shchekaturov A.M., Parshikov I.A. Object-oriented modeling in SimInTech software. Proceedings of the scientific-technical conference «Thermal physics of fast reactors (Thermal physics - 2012)». Obninsk. GNC RF-FEI Publ., 2012, p. 79 (in Russian).
10. Petukhov V.N., Parshikov I.A., Shchekaturov A.M., Timofeev K.A. Use of SimInTech Development Environment for Liquid Metal Cooled Reactor Plant Complex Dynamics Modeling. Atomnyj proekt. 2014, v. 17, pp. 54-58. (in Russian).
11. Baum F.I., Kozlov O.S., Parshikov I.A., Petukhov V.N., Timofeev K.A., Shchekaturov A.M. Software SimInTech for a program logic controllers of control system. Atomnaya energiya, 2012, v. 113, iss. 6, pp. 354-357 (in Russian).
12. Shchekaturov A.M., Timofeev K.A., Kozlov O.S. Method to develop functional software for NPP APCS using model-oriented approach in SimInTech. Universitetskiy Nauchny Zhurnal. 2015, iss. 15, pp. 80-87 (in Russian).
13. Shchekaturov A.M., Kozlov O.S., Timofeev K.A. Methodology for the development of functional software of computer aided process control system for nuclear power facilities using the object-oriented approach implemented in SimInTech software. Proceedings of the International scientific-technical conference «Computer modeling – 2015». St.Petersburg. SPbGPU Publ., 2015, pp. 140-152 (in Russian).
14. Lebedev V.O., Tolokonsky A.O., Korolev S.A., Vlasov V.A. Implementation of the experience in designing computer aided process control systems for nuclear facilities based on UMIKON package in the educational process. Izvestiya vuzov.Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 149-155 (in Russian).
15. Bibikov V.V., Koltsov V.A., Nastashchenko V.A., Kharchenko S.A. Automation of electrical equipment control system at nuclear power plant. Atomny proekt. 2013, v. 15, pp. 66-68 (in Russian).
16. Parshikov I.A., Petukhov V.N., Timofeev K.A., Shchekaturov A.M., Borovitsky S.A., Shmakov D.Yu. Development and application of a complex dynamic model of the reactor plant SVBR-100 for the design of pilot power unit. VANT. Ser. Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES. Issledovatelskie reactory. 2015, iss. 3, pp. 5-17 (in Russian).
17. Parshikov I.A., Petukhov V.N., Timofeev K.A., Shchekaturov A.M. Simulation of nuclear power plant with heavy liquid metal-cooled reactor in SimInTech. St. Petersburg. Humanities & Science University Journal. 2013, no. 5, pp. 144-156.
18. Parshikov I.A., Shchekaturov A.M., Timofeev K.A., Petukhov V.N., Khodakovsky V.V. Complex model of nuclear power plant with heavy liquid metal-cooled reactor development environment in SimInTech software. Proceedings of the International scientific-technical conference «Computer modeling – 2013». St.Petersburg. SPbGPU Publishing, 2013, pp. 175-182 (in Russian).
19. Parshikov I.A., Petukhov V.N., Timofeev K.A., Shchekaturov A.M., Borovitsky S.A., Shmakov D.Yu. Development and application of a complex dynamic model of SVBR-100 reactor plant for the design of pilot power unit. Proceedings of the scientific conference «Heavy liquid metal coolants in nuclear technology: (HLMC-2013)». Obninsk. GNC RF-FEI Publ., 2013, pp. 12-13 (in Russian).
20. Cherny V.A., Burievsky I.V., Stogov V.Yu. Optimization of the core of the reactor facility MBIR. Scientific-technical papers. Obninsk. GNC RF-FEI Publ., 2011, pp. 26-29 (in Russian).
21. Vlasov M.N., Korsun A.S., Maslov Yu.A., Merinov I.G., Kharitonov V.S. Modelling of thermal hydraulic processes in cores of fast reactors. Proceedings of the scientific-technical conference «Thermal physics of fast reactors (Thermal physics - 2012)». Obninsk. GNC RF-FEI Publ., 2012, pp. 27-28 (in Russian).