+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="pdf/2018/01/2018-01-article-01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="14"
udc="621.039.534"
title="Components of small and medium sized HLMC reactor plant circuits"
original_title="Оборудование контуров реакторных установок малой и средней мощности с тяжелыми жидкометаллическими теплоносителями"
authors=["BeznosovAV", "BokovaTA", "BokovPA"]
tags=["small and medium sized reactor plant", "main components", "technical solutions", "heavy liquid metal coolants", "SG intercircuit seal breakdown"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.01"

+++

Small and medium sized lead and lead-bismuth cooled reactors currently under development in Russia are reactors of generation IV. This paper presents a review and new science and technology solutions in line with the evolution of small and medium sized heavy liquid metal cooled (HLMC) reactor plants.

The growing interest in small and medium sized reactors for transpolar applications, as well as in regional and other nuclear power plants, including the emerging trend for the replacement of coal-fired boiler stations with small reactor units initiates the R&D activities on new design and operating concepts of fast-neutron HLMC reactors. Such concepts are based on the unique domestic experience in building and operating ground prototype facilities and series reactors with lead-bismuth coolants, as well as on the experience of building nuclear power units for different applications. The solutions in question improve the qualities of advanced HLMC reactors, primarily in economic and safety terms, as compared to other small and medium sized reactor facilities. Low, nearly atmospheric, reactor circuit pressure (0.1 – 0.5 MPa), small thickness of the circuit walls, high temperature of the HLMC (up to 500 – 550°C) and the generated steam (400 – 500°C) with a pressure of 4.0 to 24.0 MPa, high unit efficiencies (up to 45%), a twocircuit reactor design, use of nitride fuel and other advanced solutions provide for qualitatively improved and more competitive economics of these units.

Theoretical and experimental work was performed at Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University (NNSTU) to justify a small and medium sized reactor plant with horizontal heat exchangers (BRS-GPG). Nonconventional science and technology solutions were considered for improving the effectiveness and safety of HLMC power units, including the localization of a potentially hazardous severe accident of the “steam generator intercircuit seal breakdown” type. The paper presents the results of an analysis and an integrated research to support nonconventional designs for the BRS-GPG reactor plant (reactor circuit circulation patterns, steam generator type, reactor circuit heat removal in standby and emergency modes, etc.).

### References

1. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A. Equipment of power circuits with heavy liquid metal coolants in nuclear power. N.Novgorod. Litera Publ., 2012, 536 p. (in Russian).
2. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Bokov P.A. Technologies and main components for circuits of reactor plants and commercial and research facilities with lead and lead-bismuth coolants. N.Novgorod. Litera Publ., 2016, 488 p. (in Russian).
3. Beznosov A.V., Molodtsov A.A., Bokova T.A., Stepanov V.S., Klimov N.N., Bolvanchikov S.N. Nuclear power plant. Russian Federation patent of invention No. 2320035 RF. Bul. No. 8, published 03.20.2008 (in Russian).
4. Beznosov A.V. Bokova T.A., Molodcov A.A. Experimental studies into the processes accompanying the intercircuit seal breakdown in a steam generator with lead or lead-bismuth coolant and optimization of its design. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2006, no. 4, pp. 3-11 (in Russian).
5. Beznosov A.V., Molodtsov A.A., Bokova T.A., Stepanov V.S., Klimov N.N., Bolvanchikov S.N. Nuclear power plant. Russian Federation patent of invention No. 2313143 RF. Bul. No. 35, published 12.20.2007 (in Russian).
6. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Novozhilova O.O., Meluzov A.G., Metrinskij R.A., Novinskij E.G. Experimental studies into the processes accompanying the steam generator intercircuit seal breakdown within operationally safe limits in an HLMC reactor facility. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2016, no. 2, pp. 154-162 (in Russian).
7. Beznosov A.V., Novozhilova O. O., Molodcov A.A., Jarmonov M.V., Bokov P.A., Nazarov A.V. Reactor plants with horizontal steam generators. VANT. Ser.: Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov, 2013, no. 2, pp. 79-83 (in Russian).
8. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Novozhilova O.O., Matjunin A.K., Khimich V.L., Pichkov S.N. Experimental studies into the processes accompanying the SG intercircuit seal breakdown accident in heavy liquid metal cooled reactor facilities. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2012, no. 4, pp. 92-101 (in Russian).
9. Iarmonov M., Novozhilova O., Bokov P., Beznosov A.V. Experimental studies of thermal hydraulics of a HLMC flow around heat exchange surfaces, DOI: 10.1115/ICONE21-15248, International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, Proceedings, ICONE. 2013.
10. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Lvov A.V., Lemekhov V.V., Nazarov A.V., Skoblikov E.O. Nuclear power plant. Russian Federation patent of invention RU(11)139703(13)U1. Bul. No. 11, published 04.20.2014 (in Russian).
11. Bokov P.A., Beznosov A.V., Lvov A.V., Iarmonov M.V., Bokova T.A. The study of cavitation characteristics of a heavy liquid7metal coolant, DOI: 10.1115/ICONE21-15263, International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, Proceedings, ICONE, 2013.
12. Beznosov A.V., Novozhilova O.O., Jarmonov M.V., L’vov A.V., Himich V.L., Matjunin A.K. Experimental studies into natural circulation in lead and lead-bismuth cooled systems. Atomnaya energiya, 2012, v. 113, no. 6, pp. 351-354 (in Russian).
13. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Pinaev S.S., Nazarov A.D. Nuclear power plant. Patent RU24748U1. Bul. No. 23, published 08.20.2002] (in Russian).
14. Beznosov A.V. Chernysh A.S., Zudin A.D., Bokova T.A., Novinskij E.G. Characterization of heat exchange in low-pressure heat exchangers as applied to lead and lead-bismuth cooled circuits. Atomnaya energiya, 2015, v. 118, no. 5, pp. 266-271 (in Russian).
15. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Zudin A.D., L’vov A.V., Solov’jov A.O., Chernysh A.S. Ways to regulate the lead coolant oxygen thermodynamic activity. Proceedings of NNSTU n.a. R.E. Alekseyev, 2014, no. 3 (105), pp. 130-138 (in Russian).
16. Beznosov A. V., Novozhilova O.O., Molodcov A.A., Savinov S.Yu., Bokova T.A., Himich V.L. Heat-exchange characteristics of the core and steam generator surface models in regulating the content of impurities in a lead coolant circuit. Atomnaya energiya, 2008, v. 104, no. 2, pp. 74-80 (in Russian).
17. Beznosov A.V., Chernysh A.S., Sergeev S.I., Zudin A.I., Bokova T.A. Experimental study into the heat removal from HLMC by cooling fluid at atmospheric pressure. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno7reaktornye konstanty. 2016, no. 4, pp. 75-83 (in Russian).
18. Beznosov A.V. Drozdov Yu.N., Bokova T.A., Novozhilova O.O., Yarmonov M.V., Mahov K.A. Tribotechnical studies of contact areas in the lead and lead-bismuth coolant environment. Vestnik mashinostroeniya, 2012, no. 1, pp. 43-46 (in Russian).
19. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Zefirov M.D., Baranova V.S., Kustov M.S., Leonov V.N. Experimental study into the regulation of the oxidizing potential in a lead and lead-bismuth coolant circuit using a gas mass exchanger. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2010, no. 2, pp. 134-141 (in Russian).
20. Beznosov A. V., Semjonov A.V., Baranova O.S. A method to protect structural steels against corrosion in lead coolant and its melts. Utility model patent No. 107848, Russia, 2005. Reg. date 09.10.2006 (in Russian).
21. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P. A, Chernysh A. S., Kostin M. V., Zudin A. D. Nuclear power plant. Utility model patent No. 137152, Russia. Reg. date 01.27.2014 (in Russian).
22. Beznosov A. V., Bokova T.A., Bokov P. A., Baranova V.S. Nuclear Power Plant. Utility model patent No. 78002, Russia, 2008. Reg. date 11.10.2008 (in Russian).