+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file="pdf/2018/01/2018-01-article-04.pdf"
first_page="33"
last_page="40"
udc="621.039.54(04)"
title="Small power lead fast reactor with metallic fuel"
original_title="Свинцовый реактор малой мощности с металлическим топливом"
authors=["KhorasanovGL", "SamohinDS", "ZevyakinAS", "ZemskovEA", "BlokhinAI"]
tags=["fast reactor", "hard neutron spectrum", "metallic uranium-plutonium fuel", "natural lead coolant", "americium-241"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.04"

+++

The possibility for obtaining a hard neutron spectrum in small reactor cores is considered. A harder spectrum, than spectra in known fast sodium and molten salt reactors, has been obtained thanks to the selection of relatively small core dimensions and the use of metallic fuel and natural lead (natPb) coolant. In the calculations for these compositions, increased average neutron energy and a high share of hard neutrons in the spectrum (with energies greater than 0.8 MeV) are achieved which is caused by the small inelastic neutron-fuel interaction in the absence of light chemical elements and the coolant containing 52.3% of 208Pb, a low moderating isotope.

An interest in creating reactors with a hard neutron spectrum is explained by the fact that such reactors can be practically used as burners of minor actinides, as well as isotope production and research reactors with new consumer properties. With the uranium oxide fuel (UO2) replaced by metallic uranium-plutonium fuel (U-Pu-Zr), the reactors under consideration have the average energy of neutrons and the share of hard neutrons increasing from 0.554 to 0.724 MeV and from 18 to 28% respectively. And the one-group fission cross-section of 241Am increases from 0.359 to 0.536 barn, while the probability of 241Am fission increases from 22 to 39%. It is suggested that fuel resulting from regeneration of irradiated fuel from fast sodium cooled power reactors to be used as part of future burner reactors. It contains unburnt plutonium isotopes and some 1% of minor actinides (MA) which transmutate into fission products in the process of being reburnt in a harder spectrum. This will make it possible to reduce the MA content in the burner spent fuel and facilitate so the long-term storage conditions for high-level nuclear waste in dedicated devices.

The reported research was funded by Russian Foundation for Basic Research and the Government of the Kaluga region, grant No 18-48-400004.

### References

1. Ganev I.H., Orlov V.V., Adamov E.O. Achieving radiation equivalence for radioactive waste of nuclear power engineering. Atomnaya Energiya. 1992, v. 73, no. 1, pp. 44-50 (in Russian).
2. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.H., Lopatkin A.V., Mursatov V.G., Orlov V.V. Transmutation fuel cycle in a large scale nuclear power in Russia. Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 1999 (in Russian).
3. Lopatkin A.V. Fuel cycle of large scale nuclear power engineering of Russia based on principles of fuel and radiation balance and nonproliferation. Dr. tech. sci. diss. Obninsk. SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2013, 45 p. (in Russian).
4. Troyanov V.M. Two plus one. Two component systems (VVER and BN) as a base for the future and a solution of SNF problem. RosEnergoAtom. 2016, no. 9, pp. 22-29 (in Russian).
5. Haas D., Garbil R., Hugon M. The European activity on ADS. The EURATOM Research Framework Program. Proc. 2nd Int. Workshop «Technology and Components of Accelerator-driven Systems». NEA/NSC/DOC (2015) 7, 2015, pp. 25-29.
6. Gabrielli F. Fuel for ADS: state-of-the-art, requirements, current and future programmes. Ibid., pp. 38-48.
7. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Neutron spectrum hardening in critical and subcritical reactors cooled with 208Pb. Ibid., pp. 65-69.
8. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Incineration of minor actinides in hard neutron spectra. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 3, pp. 96-103 (in Russian).
9. Khorasanov G.L., Ed. Application of Stable Lead Isotope Pb-208 in Nuclear Power Engineering and Its Acquisition Techniques. Nova Publishers, New-York, 2013, 184 p.
10. Khorasanov G. and Blokhin A. Concerning Am-241 Incineration in the Nuclear Power Installations. Transactions of the American Nuclear Society. 2014, v. 111, no. 2, pp. 1329-1330.
11. Khorasanov G. Isotopic Tailored Lead Coolant with New Consuming Properties for Fast Reactors. Transactions of the American Nuclear Society. 2015, v. 112, no. 1, pp. 803-804.
12. Khorasanov G, Zemskov E and Blokhin A. Concerning advantages in using 208Pb as such a FR coolant. Journal of Physics Conference Series. 781(1): 012005 January 2017.
13. Khorasanov G.L., Blokhin A.I. Some macroscopic characteristics of fast reactors of intermediate capacity. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 18-22 (in Russian).
14. Gulevich A.V., Zemskov E.A., Komlev O.G., Ponomaryov L.I. Accelerator-blanket system as an incinerator of Np, Am, Cm in various scenario of closing nuclear fuel cycle. Atomnaya energiya. 2013, v. 115, no. 3, pp. 123-132 (in Russian).
15. Kazansky Yu.A., Romanov M.I. Transmuting minor actinides with thermal reactor neutrons. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 140-148 (in Russian).
16. Kazansky Yu.A., Ivanov N.V., Romanov M.I. The results of the transmuting minor actinides with thermal and fast reactors neutrons. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 77-86 (in Russian).
17. Samokhin D.S., Khorasanov G.L., Tormyshev I.V., Zemskov E.A., Gostev A.L. Terehova A.M., Kuz’michyov S.A. Small power lead fast reactor for purposes of education. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika). 2015, no. 3, pp. 135-141 (in Russian).
18. Khorasanov G.L., Samokhin D.S., Zevyakin A.S.241Am incineration probability in lead fast reactors. Proc. Int. Conf. «Ecological, Industrial and Energetical Safety-2017», 11-15 September 2017, Sevastopol’. Sevastopol’. SevGU Publ., 2017, pp. 1467-1471 (in Russian).
19. Vaganov I.V., Gadjiev G.I., Kosulin N.S., Syuzev V.N. Results of postirradiation examinations of FA UPTS-1 with metallic U-Pu-Zr fuel. Proc. of the 6-th Russian Conf. on reactor materials. Dimitrovgrad. NIIAR Publ., 2000, v. 2 (in Russian).
20. Khorasanov G.L., Samokhin D.S. A concept of BRUTS series reactors. Proc. of the 2-nd Int. Conf. of young scientists, specialists, postgraduates and students «Innovative nuclear reactors of small and ultra-small power», May 15-17, 2017, Obninsk. Obninsk. INPE NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2017, pp. 19-21 (in Russian).
21. Briesmeister J.F. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code, Version 4B, LA-12625-M, Los Alamos National Laboratory, March 1997.
22. Aitkalieva A, Papesch C.A. Microstructural characterization of metallic transmutation fuels. Presentation at the 14-th Information Exchange Meeting on Actinide and Fission Products Partitioning and Transmutation, IEMPT-14, 17-20 October 2016, San Diego, USA. Abstract is published in the IEMPT-14 Proceedings: NEA/NSC/R (2017) 3, pp. 181-182.