+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2018-02"
issue_name="2018 - #02"
issue_id="1"
number="06"
file="pdf/2018/01/2018-01-article-06.pdf"
first_page="53"
last_page="62"
udc="621.039.526 +620.9+544(075)"
title="A study of the gas-water mixture in the rod control cluster assembly sleeve cavity of the RBMK-1000 reactor"
original_title="Исследование газоводной смеси в полости гильзы кластерного регулирующего органа реактора РБМК-1000"
authors=["BelozerovVI", "MilinchukVK"]
tags=["RBMK-1000 reactor", "rod control cluster assembly (RCCA)", "control and protection system (CPS)", "fuel element", "absorber element", "aluminum", "aluminum alloys SAV-1 and ASD-4", "water", "hydrogen", "sodium and potassium water glass", "crystalline sodium metasilicate hydrates", "lime"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.06"

+++

The design of the technical device for removing the gas-water medium from the rod control cluster assembly (RCCA) sleeve cavity to the storage pool ladder of the RBMK-1000 rector makes it possible to install a sensor for monitoring the composition of the gas-water mixture. When the absorbing elements move in the RCCA, they rub against the walls of the longitudinal channels made of the aluminum alloy SAV-1. Under mechanical action, the oxide film is partially or completely removed from the channel surface, and the alloy passes into a state without a protective oxide layer. The purpose of the study is to obtain experimental data on the interaction of aluminum alloys SAV-1 and ASD-4 with the aqueous medium of the RCCA sleeve when chemical compounds are present in water that remove the passivating oxide layer (Al2O3) from the metal surface. As chemical activators for the alloys, silicon-containing compounds (sodium water glass, potassium water glass, crystalline sodium metasilicate hydrates) and lime are considered. Reactions of the aluminum alloys in aqueous solutions with sodium and potassium water glass are endothermic, whereas in aqueous solutions of crystalline sodium metasilicate hydrate and lime they are exothermic. The hydrogen yields for the alloys SAV-1 and ASD-4 at 60°C are ~ 0.6 l per 1 g of the reacted metal. The hydrogen formed during the interaction of the aluminum alloy SAV-1 with water is part of the gas-water mixture in the RCCA sleeve cavity. Therefore, the hydrogen formation should be taken into account when monitoring the gas-water mixture in the RCCA sleeve of the RBMK-1000 reactor.

### References

1. Gerasimov V.V. Corrosion of reactor materials. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1980, 255 p. (in Russian).
2. Kalin B.A., Platonov P.A., Tuzov V.Yu., Chernov I.I., Shtrombakh Ya.I. Structural materials of nuclear technology. Volume VI. Moscow. National Research Nuclear University MEPhI Publ., 2012, 736 p. (in Russian).
3. Al’tman M.B., Andreev G.N., Arbuzov Yu.P. Application of aluminum alloys. Handbook. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1985, 344 p. (in Russian).
4. Balandin Yu.F., Gorynin I.V., Zvezdin Yu.I. Structural materials of nuclear power plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 280 p. (in Russian).
5. Fridlyander I.N. Aluminum alloys in aerospace and nuclear engineering. Bulletin of the Russian Academy of Sciences. 2004, v. 74, no. 12, pp. 1076-1081 (in Russian).
6. Shilina A.S., Milinchuk V.K. Physico-chemical processes of obtaining hydrogen and the adsorbent in accordance with the principles of «green» chemistry. Al’ternativnaya ehnergetika i ehkologiya, 2009, no. 10, pp. 10-14 (in Russian).
7. Milinchuk V.K., Shilina A.S., Anan’eva O.A. Research environmentally safe, energy-saving methods for producing hydrogen by chemical decomposition of water. Al’ternativnaya ehnergetika i ehkologiya. 2012, no. 4, pp. 49-54 (in Russian).
8. Milinchuk V.K., Belozerov V.I., Shilina A.S., Anan’eva O.A., Kunicyna T.E., Gordienko A.B. Study of the generation of hydrogen by reaction of aluminum with aqueous solutions. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 2, pp. 39-46 (in Russian).
9. Milinchuk V.K., Klinshpont EH.R., Belozerov V.I. Chemical decomposition of water into hydrogen in heterogeneous aluminum-containing compositions. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 32-38 (in Russian)
10. Milinchuk V.K., Klinshpont E.R., Belozerov V.I. Aluminum oxide coatings transformations in the simulation of the reactor factors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 2, pp. 49-59 (in Russian).
11. Milinchuk V.K., Roshchektaev B.M. Autonomous hydrogen generator. Patent 2 2 510 876 RF. MPK SO1V 3/08 . Bull. 2011, no. 12 (in Russian).
12. Klinshpont E.R., Roshchektaev B.M., Milinchuk V.K. The kinetics of accumulation of hydrogen by the chemical decomposition of water in heterogeneous compositions. Al’ternativnaya ehnergetika i ehkologiya. 2012, no. 9, pp. 116-120 (in Russian).
13. Milinchuk V.K., Klinshpont EH.R., Belozerov V.I. Autonomous hydrogen generator based on chemical decomposition of water with aluminum. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya ehnergetika. 2015, no. 2, pp. 49-59 (in Russian).
14. Ran F., Adamantnades A., Kenton Dzh., Braun Ch. Handbook of nuclear energy technologies. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 752 p. (in Russian).
15. Margulova T.H. Nuclear power plants. Textbook for high schools. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 1994, 296 p. (in Russian).
16. NR-040-02. Rules for hydrogen explosion protection at a nuclear plant. Moscow. Gostekhnadzor Publ., 2003, 5 p. (in Russian).
17. Mitigation of hydrogen hazards in severe accidents in nuclear power plants. International atomic energy agency. Vienna, 2011.
18. Roshchektaev B.M. Water chemistry at NPP with VVER71000 and RBMK71000.Textbook. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2010, 132 p. (in Russian).