+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2018-01"
issue_name="2018 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="08"
file="pdf/2018/01/2018-01-article-08.pdf"
first_page="75"
last_page="86"
udc="620.98:621.039"
title="Small nuclear power plants for power supply to the arctic regions: spent nuclear fuel radioactivity assessment"
original_title="Атомные станции малой мощности для энергоснабжения арктических регионов: оценка радиоактивности отработавшего ядерного топлива"
authors=["NaumovVA", "GusakSA", "NaumovAV"]
tags=["Russian Arctic regions", "small nuclear power plants", "reactors", "spent nuclear fuel", "fuel cycle", "radioactivity"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.08"

+++

The article presents the analysis of the projects’ materials about small nuclear power plants (SNPP) with the reactors cooled by pressurized water (LWR reactors) and Pb-Bi eutectics (SVBR reactors). There have been developed mathematical models of fuel cycles of the cores in the reactor types ABV, KLT-40S, RITM-200M, UNITERM, SVBR-10 and SVBR-100 on the basis of the information prescribed about the parameters of the fuel cycle, design and materials of the cores, thermodynamic characteristics of coolants of the primary circuit of various reactor facilities. The KRATER software was applied for mathematical modeling of the fuel cycles where spatial-energy distribution of neutron flux density is determined within multi-group diffusion approximation and heterogeneity of the cores is taken into account by the albedo method in a model of a reactor cell. The computational studies have been carried out of the kinetics of the isotopes’ burn-up in the starting fuel charge (235U, 238U) and the accumulation of long-lived fission products (85Kr, 90Sr, 137Cs, 151Sm) and the actinides (238,239,240,241,242Pu, 236U, 237Np, 241Am, 244Cm) in the cores of the SNPP’s considered reactor facilities. The information obtained has allowed estimating the radiation characteristics of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) and comparing the long-lived radioactivity of irradiated fuel from SNPP reactors and their prototypes (transport reactors). The mass isotopic compositions of the cores have been determined and on the basis there were estimated α and βactivities of long-lived fission products and actinides which characterize long-lived radioactivity of SNF. The analysis of information about the specific radioactivity has shown the radiation characteristics of SNF in the SNPP reactors and their prototypes (transport reactors) to have similar in magnitude values. This allows the conclusion about applicability of management technologies of irradiated fuel used for ship reactor facilities for the SNF from the SNPP reactors.

### References

1. The development strategy of the Arctic zone of the Russian Federation and national security for the period up to 2020. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/499002465 (accessed 15 Jan. 2015) (in Russian).
2. Adamov E.O. The development status of SNPP in the world and Russia, the priorities and prospects for their construction. Available at: http://www.innov-rosatom.ru/files/articles/5e334977fec5bf72d7dedcb904a914c0.pdf (accessed 6 Oct. 2015) (in Russian).
3. Voropaj N.I., Saneev B.G., Ivavanova I.Yu., Izhbuldin A.K. Comparative efficiency of the use of low-capacity nuclear power plants in the local power systems in Eastern Russia. In Low-power nuclear power plants – a new line in the development of power systems. Vol. 2. Moscow. Academ-Print Publ., 2015, pp. 59-71 (in Russian).
4. Mel’nikov N.N., Konukhin V.P., Naumov V.A., Gusak S.A. Reactor units for power supply of remote and inaccessible regions: selection issue. Vestnik MGTU. 2015, v. 18, no 2, pp. 198-208.
5. Petrunin V.V., Gureeva L.V., Fadeev Yu.P., Shmelev I.V., Lepekhin A.N., Udalishchev S.V. Prospects for development of nuclear power plants with small and medium power reactors. In Low -power nuclear power plants – a new line in the development of power systems. Vol. 2. Moscow. Academ-Print Publ., 2015, pp. 59-71 (in Russian).
6. Saneev B.G., Ivanova I.Yu., Tuguzova T.F., Frank M.I. Role of small nuclear power plants in areas of decentralized power supply in Russia’s East. In Low9power nuclear power plants – a new line in the development of power systems. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2011, pp. 88-100 (in Russian).
7. Makarov V.I., Pologih B.G., Khlopkin N.S., Mitenkov F.M., Panov Yu.K., Polunichev V.I., Yakovlev O.A. The experience of construction and operation of the civilian ships reactor plants. Atomnaya energiya. 2000, v.89, iss. 3, pp. 179-188 (in Russian).
8. Ignat’ev S.V., Zabud’ko A.N., Zrodnikov A.N., Pankratov D.V., Toshinskij G.I. Unloading, storage and subsequent management of spent nuclear fuel of liquid-metal reactors: state and problems. Proc. International scientific workshop «Scientific and technical issues in the management of SNF and RW of decommissioned nuclear submarines and nuclear-powered surface vessels». Мoscow. Komtekh-Print Publ., 2007, v. 1, pp. 189-208 (in Russian).
9. Naumov V.A., Rubin I.E., Dneprovskaya N.M. The software package KRATER for calculation of neutron-physical characteristics of thermal nuclear reactors: Preprint IPE-14. Minsk. Institute of Power Engineering Problems, Academy of Sciences of Belarus, 1996. 39 p. (in Russian).
10. England T.R., Rider B.F. Evaluation and Compilation of Fission Product Yields. Report LA-UR-94-3106, ENDF-349. USA. Los Alamos. LosA lamos National Laboratory, 1994. 173 р. Available at: http://t2.lanl.gov/nis/publications/endf349.pdf (accessed 29 Jan. 2017).
11. Alekseev P.N., Chibinyaev A.V., Polismakov A.A. Core lifetime increase of a reactor KLT-40S when the transition to a fuel composition based on uranium dioxide. Technical reference. Institute of nuclear reactors RRC «Kurchatov Institute». Available at: http://shkolnie.ru/fizika/18416/index.html (accessed 10 Nov. 2016) (in Russian).
12. Vatulin A.V., Kulakov G.V., Lysenko V.A., Morozov A.V. Development of fuel rods for reactor cores of floating power plants (FPP) and low-power nuclear power plants (LPNPP): state and perspectives. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i novye materialy. 2005, no. 2(65), pp. 146-148 (in Russian).
13. Voronkov A.V., Sychugova E.P., Dedul A.V., Kalchenko V.V., Nikolaev A.A., Rakshun E.V. SVBR-100 reactor life-time calculation considering control and burn-up compensation RODS movement. VANT. Ser. Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES. 2009, iss. 24, pp. 38-43 (in Russian).
14. Egorov S.V. The construction potential of energy sources on the basis of SNPP for use in Arctic conditions. Available at: http://www.ndexpo.ru/mediafiles/u/files/materials_2016/4/5 Egorov.pdf (accessed 28 Oct. 2016) (in Russian).
15. Klimov N.N. Lead-bismuth fast reactors for nuclear power stations of small and medium power. Available at: http://www.myshared.ru/slide/74008/ (accessed 13 Jul. 2013) (in Russian).
16. Knyazevskij K.Yu., Fadeev Yu.P., Pakhomov A.N., Polunichev V.I., Veshnyakov K.B., Kabin S.V. Designs of RITM-200 reactor installation intended to provide environmentally safe and cost-effective operation of multipurpose nuclear icebreaker on Arctic routes. Arktika: ecologiya i ekonomika. 2014, no. 3(15), pp. 86-91 (in Russian).
17. Samojlov O.B., Morozov O.A., Alekseev V.N., Belyaev V.M. Implementation of the cassette-type core that meet the requirements of non-proliferation, at the head of the NPP MM on the basis of the floating power unit with reactor KLT-40C in Severodvinsk, Arkhangelsk region. Proc. of International scientific-practical conference «Small power engineering-2005». Moscow. 2005, pp. 99-104.
18. Status of Small Reactor Designs without On-site Refuelling. IAEA-TECDOC-1536. Available at: http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/te_1536_web.pdf (accessed 18 Nov. 2012).
19. Konyukhov R.A. Construction development of side reflector of reactor core SVBR-100. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/kms2014/documents/ kms2014-006.pdf (accessed 26 Jan. 2015) (in Russian).