+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2018-01"
issue_name="2018 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/01/11.pdf"
first_page="112"
last_page="121"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Analysis of acoustic signals of leak for increases in sensitivity of control due to creation of effective diagnostic features"
original_title="Анализ акустических сигналов течи для повышения чувствительности контроля за счет создания эффективных диагностических признаков"
authors=["ShvetsovDM", "TrykovEL", "LeskinST", "PuzakovAYu"]
tags=["leakage test equipment", "dispersion of the acoustic signal", "modeling of leaks of the coolant", "the method of main components", "additional diagnostic signs", "pattern recognition"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.11"

+++

Currently, to monitor the integrity of equipment and pipelines, and timely detection of leaks from the primary coolant of the reactor facility during operation of the unit at different power levels in normal operation and a disruption of the normal operation systems are used for acoustic control leak (SACL). As the main diagnostic features of leak detection systems used, the dispersion of acoustic signal and its average frequency. The sensitivity of these features is determined by the signal exceeding a predetermined threshold value, wherein the threshold value is determined by the background. Background values of the acoustic signal depend on the mode of operation of the equipment and often do not allow to determine the flow of the coolant at an early stage of its development.

The paper presents a new approach to the formation of diagnostic features detection of leaks in the circuit at an early stage of development of leaks of the coolant. The method of obtaining diagnostic features based on processing the acoustic signal accompanying the expiration of the coolant from the tubing, in different frequency ranges using the method of principal components.

The efficiency of the developed technique to detect leaks of the coolant is demonstrated on the processing of acoustic signals of the experimental device and simulation flow of coolant during depressurization of the circuit.

The sensitivity of the method even in the presence of significant acoustic background allows to detect leaks much lower consumption (up to five times) than the traditional processing of the acoustic signal.

Implementation of the developed technique does not require significant expenses on modernization of existing control systems, leaks, currently working on various nuclear power plants.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. Sistems diagnosis of VVER. Moscow. Energoatomisdat Publ., 2010. 391p. (in Russian).
2. Weiss S., Reagan W., Roe J. Experience with operator aids for nuclear power plants in the USA. In: Proc. Intern. Conf. on Man-Machine Interface in Nuclear Indastry. Tokyo, 15-19.02.1988, Vienna, 1988, pp. 323-329.
3. Leskin S.T., Slobodchuk V.I., Shelegov A.S.Analysis of VVER-1000 main circulation pump condition in operation. Isvestya vusov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no. 4, pp. 12-22 (in Russian).
4. Leskin S.T., Slobodchuk V.I., Shelegov A.S., Kashin D.Yu. Analisys of safety system pumps conditions based on their testing results. Isvestya vusov. Yadernaya energetika. 2017, no. 1, pp. 42-50 (in Russian).
5. Ujita Hiroshi. A probabilistic analysis method of evaluate the effect of human factors on plant safety. Nucl.Tehnol., 1986, v. 76, no. 3, pp. 370-376.
6. Fault diagnosis in dynamic systems. Theory and applications. Ed. by Patton R., Frank P., Clarc R. Prentice Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NY, 1989. 352 p.
7. Willsky A.S. A Survey of design methods for failure detection in dynamic systems. Automatica. 1976, v. 12, pp. 601-611.
8. Iserman R. Process fault detection based on modeling end estimation methods – a survey. Automatica. 1984, v. 20, no. 4. pp. 387-404.
9. Basseville M. Detecting changes in signal and systems – a survey. Automatica. 1988, v. 24, no. 3, pp. 309-326.
10. Frank P.M. Fault diagnosis in dynamic systems using analytical and knowledge-based redundancy - a survey and some new results. Automatica. 1990. v. 26, no. 3, pp. 459-474.
11. Reisen C., Marshall E. Evaluaning operator support system in realistic conditions at hammlab. Nuclear Engineering International. 1988, v. 33, no. 402, pp. 39-41.
12. Abagyan A.A., Dmitriev V.M, Klebanov L.A., Kroshilin A.E., Larin E.P., Morozov S.K. System for monitoring and diagnostics of NPP unit operational conditions. Atomnaya energiya. 1987, v. 63, pp. 311-315 (in Russian).
13. Herbert M.R. A review of on-line diagnostic aids for nuclear power plant operators. Nucl. Energy. 1984, v. 23, no. 4, pp. 259-264.
14. Pavelko V.I. Review of application of expert methodology systems for nuclear power engineering. Atomnaya tekhnika za rubezhom. 1990, v. 11, pp. 1-8 (in Russian).
15. Tu J., Gonsales R. Pattern recognition principles. Moscow. MIR Publ., 1978. 412 p. (in Russian).
16. Urig Robert E. Potential application of nuclear networks to nuclear power plants. Proc. Amer. Power Conf. V. 53. Pt. 2 53-rd. Annu Meet., Chicago, III., Apr. 29-May 1. 1991. pp. 946-951.
17. Fukunaga K. Introduction to statistical pattern recognition. Academic press, New York and London, 1972, 375 p.
18. Classification and clustering. Ed. by J. van Ryzin. Moscow. MIR Publ., 1980, 365 p. (in Russian).
19. Tao Gu, Tou J.T. A new criterion for optimal classification. Pattern Recognition, 1982, no. 2, pp. 1063-1065.
20. Leskin S.T. Algorithm development for abnormality detection of NPP equipment conditions based on technological testing results. Izvestia vusov. Yadernaya energetika, 1997, no. 4, pp. 4-12 (in Russian).