+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2018-01"
issue_name="2018 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/01/14.pdf"
first_page="146"
last_page="153"
udc="621.3; 621.039"
title="Radiation induced separation and accumulation of electric charge in supercapacitors"
original_title="Радиационно-индуцированное разделение и накопление электрического заряда в суперконденсаторах"
authors=["StepanovVA", "ChernovVA", "ParshikovYuG", "LebedevVP", "KharanzhevskiyEV"]
tags=["supercapacitor", "neutron irradiation", "radiation-induced electric charge"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.14"

+++

In current source with radioactive isotope (CSRI), the direct conversion of nuclear energy into electrical energy occurs as a result of the separation of electric charges in the decay of radioactive isotopes. Previously it was shown that asymmetric supercapacitors can be CSRI, if after the pulse reactor irradiation and internal induced activity, the accumulation of electric charge occurs to several coulombs. In this paper, the separation and accumulation of electric charge in supercapacitors were studied during neutron irradiation (in situ). A source of neutrons was used for irradiation, which provided the absorbed dose rate up to 0.1 Gy/s. The electrophysical characteristics of cylindrical supercapacitors with organic electrolyte produced by OJSC «ELEKOND» were studied. The symmetrical and asymmetric supercapacitors are compared. It is shown that the accumulation of charge effectively occurs in an asymmetric capacitor, does not depend on the neutron flux, but depend on the neutron dose. The electrical voltage between the electrodes of a symmetrical supercapacitor with a capacity of 100 F under irradiation to an absorbed dose of 50 Gy increases to 1.24 mV. Under irradiation with the same dose, there is a significant increase in the electrical voltage of asymmetric supercapacitors to 1.15 V. After long processes of the radiation-induced electric charge redistribution in the electrolyte and carbon nanoparticles and of formation of the electrical double layer, the electrical voltage between the electrodes and the capacitance increase after the irradiation stop. After irradiation through 1.5·105 s the charge increases to ~ 5·10–3 Cl. The post-radiation increase in the capacitance of asymmetric supercapacitors is ~ 5 mF.

### References

1. Nano0 and microsystem technology. From research to development. Ed. by P.P. Maltsev. Moscow. Tekhnosfera Publ., 2005, 590 p. (in Russian).
2. Verner V.D., Maltsev P.P., Reznev A.A., Saurov A.N., Chaplygin Yu.A. Current trends of development of the microsystem equipment. Nano0 i mikrosistemnaya tekhnika. 2008, no. 8, pp. 2-6 (in Russian).
3. Anufrienko V.B., Kovalev V.P., Kulikov A.V., Chernov V.A. Converters of nuclear energy in electric on secondary electrons. Rossiyskiy khimicheskiy zhurnal. 2006, v. LV, pp. 120-125 (in Russian).
4. Anufrienko V.B., Mikhailova A.M., Palagushkin A.N., Sergeev A.P., Sigeikin G.I., Somov I.E., Chernov V.A. Use of supermultilayered nanostructures for direct transformation of nuclear energy to electric. Nano0 i mikrosistemnaya tekhnika. 2008, no. 8, pp. 30-38 (in Russian).
5. Chernov V.A., Palagushkin A.N., Prudnikov N.V., Sergeev A.P., Sigeikin G.I., Leonova E.A. Production and research of properties of nanostructures for direct transformation of nuclear energy in electric with use of issue of secondary electrons. Nano0 i mikrosistemnaya tekhnika. 2010, no. 11. pp. 2-9 (in Russian).
6. Chernov V.A., Miterev A.M., Prudnikov N.V., Sigeikin G.I., Leonova E.A. Optimization of structure and the sizes of the sources of current based on direct transformation of nuclear energy in electric with use of issue of secondary electrons. Nano0 i mikrosistemnaya tekhnika. 2011, no. 8, pp. 21-26 (in Russian).
7. Chernov V.A., Stepanov V.A., Prudnikov N.V., Sigeikin G.I., Leonova E.A. Developments of the nanostructured converters of energy of secondary electrons for creation of tiny sources of current of constant readiness. Nano0 i mikrosistemnaya tekhnika. 2015, no. 2. pp. 57-64 (in Russian).
8. Chernov V.A., Stepanov V.A., Sigeikin G.I., Prudnikov N.V., Eremin V.P. Tiny nanostructured current sources on the basis of direct transformation of nuclear energy. Rossiyskiy khimicheskiy zhurnal. 2016, v. LX, no. 3, pp. 20-25 (in Russian).
9. Uchaikin V.V., Ambrozevich A.S., Sibatov.R.T., Ambrozevich S.A., Morozova E.V. Memory and nonlinear transport effect in charging-discharging of a supercapacitor. Zhurnal Technicheskoy Physiki. 2016, v. 1, no. 2, pp. 250-259 (in Russian).
10. Bertrand N., Sabatier J., Briat O., Vinassa J.M. Fractional Non-Linear modelling of ultracapacitors. Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simul. 2010, v. 15, no. 5, pp. 1327-1337.
11. Stldakova V., Sikula J., Majzner J., Seldak P., Kuparowitz T., Buergler B., Vasina P. Supercapacitor equivalent electrical circuit model based on charges redistribution by diffusion. Journal of Power Sourses. 2015, v. 286, pp. 58-65.
12. Buller S., Karden E., Kok D., De Doncker R.W. Modeling the dynamic behavior of supercapacitors using impedance spectroscopy. IEEE Trans Industry Appl. 2002, v. 38 (6), pp. 1622-1626.
13. Ricketts B. W., Ton-That C. Self Discharge of Carbon-Based Supercapacitors with Organic Electrolytes. Journal of Power Sources. 2000, v. 89, no. 1, pp. 64-69, 1999.
14. Yu A., Chabot V., Zhang J. Electrochemical Supercapacitors for Energy Storage and Delivery: Fundamentals and Applications CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2013. 373 p.
15. Shi L., Crow M.L. Comparison of ultracapacitor electric circuit models. Proceedings of IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 2008, pp. 1-6.