+++

categories="article"
date="2018-03-23T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2018-01"
issue_name="2018 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="15"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2018/01/15.pdf"
first_page="154"
last_page="164"
udc="681.5.017"
title="Implementation of the diversity principle of software and hardware complexes of process control systems for nuclear facilities in educational process"
original_title="Реализация принципа разнообразия программно-технических комплексов АСУ ТП объектов атомной отрасли в учебном процессе"
authors=["TolokonskyAO", "VolodinVS"]
tags=["diversity", "computer modeling", "software and hardware complex", "nuclear power plants", "automated control systems"]
rubric = "training"
rubric_name = "Personnel training"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.15"

+++

Training personnel for the nuclear industry is an important problem for all countries where nuclear power plants are operated. Higher educational institutions develop educational programs for training specialists in nuclear technologies as well as qualification programs for power plant personnel. As information technology develops, more and more modern equipment is integrated into the educational process. In view of the fact that computer modeling of dynamic processes in the equipment of power facilities is one of the most important stages in designing nuclear power plants, laboratory workshops of institutes are equipped with hardware/software systems for performing numerical experiments. When conducting classes, it is advisable to use equipment that is operated by nuclear power providers, i.e., TSW&HW control cabinets and reactor computerized multifunctional analyzer. This article describes the experience of creating a laboratory complex to be used by students for performing their course works and final projects. The key feature of this complex is the software/hardware diversity of the object model under study and the control part. The object model is performed on the UMICOM software and hardware complex in the RS-Prog technological programming environment or with the interpreter MikBASIC. The control algorithms are implemented on the TSW&HW instrumentation cabinet using programmable function modules. The functional modules are configured by the GET-R software using the basic function library. Finally, an example is given of a power management system for the one-group VVER reactor model.

### References

1. Aleksakov G.N., GavrilinV.V., FyodorovV.A. Personal analog computer. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1992. 256 p. (in Russian).
2. Vygovsky S.B., Korolyov S.A., ChernovE.V. Laboratory based on multifunctional analyzer reactor facility of NPP with VVER. Vestnik Natsional’nogo Issledovatel’skogo Yadernogo Universiteta «MIFI». 2012, no. 1, pp. 104-110 (in Russian)
3. Dabney J.B., Harman T.L. Mastering Simulink 4. New Jersey, Prentice Hall Publ., 2003. 403 p.
4. VlasovV.A., Korolyov S.A., LebedevV.O., Tolokonsky A.O. Implementation of the experience in designing APCS systems for nuclear facilities based on UMIKON package in the educational process. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 1, pp. 149-155 (in Russian).
5. Tolokonsky A.O. Instruments of optimal adaptive control in SCADA-system MikSYS. Pribory i sistemy upravleniya. 2007, no. 1, p. 15 (in Russian).
6. Vlasov V.A., Tolokonsky A.O. Application program package for SCADA development and MikSYS operator design. Pribory i sistemy upravleniya. 1999, no. 9, p. 35 (in Russian).
7. Lebedev V.O., Komisarchuk S.Yu., Obnosov A.V. Structure and basic features of the MikSYS software package for designing control systems based on the UMIKON complex. Promyshlennye kontrollery ASU. 2004, no. 1, pp. 35-41 (in Russian).
8. Vlasov V.A., Tolokonsky A.O., Golovanyov V.E. Probability characteristics of display systems failure. Proc. Scientific session of MEPhI. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 2005, v. 1, p. 42 (in Russian).
9. Vlasov V.A., Golovanyov V.E. Statistical tests of program systems. Proc. Scientific session of MEPhI. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 2004, pp. 36-37 (in Russian).
10. VlasovV.A., GolovanyovV.E., Tolokonsky A.O. Analysis of display system failure probability. Promyshlennye kontrollery ASU. 2005, no. 4, p.25 (in Russian).
11. Zverkov V.V. Automated process control system for nuclear power plants. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2014. 560 p. (in Russian).
12. Dorf R.C., Bishop R.H. Modern control systems. Boston. Addison-Wesley Publ., 1998. 832 p.
13. Ivaschenko N.N. Automatic control. Theory and system elements. Moscow. Mashino-stroenie Publ., 1978. 736 p. (in Russian).
14. Kim D.P. Control theory. Moscow. FIZMATLIT Publ., 2010. 312 p. (in Russian).
15. Voronov A.A. Fundamentals of control theory. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1965. 395 p. (in Russian).
16. Bat’ G.A. Fundamentals of theory and methods of calculation of nuclear energy reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1982. 511 p. (in Russian).
17. Klimov A.N. Fundamentals of nuclear and neutron physics. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 2004. 240 p. (in Russuan).
18. Kessler G. Nuclear fission reactors. Potential role and risks of converters and breeders. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986. 261 p. (in Russian).
19. Potapenko P.T. Dynamics of nuclear reactor. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 1989. 73 p. (in Russian).
20. Potapenko P.T. Nuclear reactor control systems. Moscow. MIFIPubl, 1991. 64 p. (in Russian).