+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:23:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="/pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="19"
udc="621.311.25:621.039.51"
title="Prospects of VVER-SKD in a closed fuel cycle"
original_title="Перспективы использования реактора ВВЭР-СКД в замкнутом топливном цикле"
authors=["GlebovAP", "KlushinAV", "BaranayevYuD"]
tags=["international forum «Generation IV»", "fast reactor", "sodium", "lead", "supercritical water", "MOX-fuel", "closure of the fuel cycle", "the spent nuclear fuel", "burning minor actinides"]
rubric = "Сurrentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.01"

+++

IAEA supervised a research project (from early in 2005 till late in 2007) on innovative nuclear reactors and fuel cycles (International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Cycles – INPRO), 8 countries with developed atomic power taking part in it. The aim of the project was to evaluate a nuclear power system based on a closed fuel cycle (CFC) with fast reactors in terms of its evolution, specification of implementation stages and duration, providing a basis and a field for joint R&D work. The countries agreed to use the commercial system CNFC-FR (Commercial Nuclear Fuel Cycles-Fast Reactors) as a standard in evaluation. The system is ready for wide application in the upcoming 2-3 decades and is based on proven technologies such as sodium coolant, pelletized mixed oxide (МОХ) fuel and advanced technology for aquatic processing.

Despite the common fundamentals of the CNFC-FR system, there are significant differences between the nuclear power systems existing in the countries participating in the joint studies and between the strategies for their development, which is the reason for the differences in the implementation of closed fuel cycle. In some countries it is proposed that, besides sodium, gas and lead should be used. In addition to МОХ fuel, consideration is given to a denser nitride and metal fuel, together with different U-Pu, U-Th fuel cycles.

Since 2000 many countries have been supporting development of G4 supercritical water-cooled thermal and fast neutron reactors (Supercritical Water-Cooled Reactors – SCWR). It is planned to have built demonstration reactors followed by commercial NPPs by 2025. Development of SCWR reactors will bring about changes in working out AE strategy as well as CFC process in some countries.

The report examines peculiarities of implementing closed fuel cycle in Russia, implementation stages and duration, associated problems and possible ways of dealing with them; it also proposes solutions for optimizing fuel cycle.

### References

1. A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems. 2002, 91 p. Available at: http://www.gen-4org/PDFs/GenIVRoadmap.pdf,
2. Kirillov P.L., Poro I. Generation IV nuclear reactors as the basis for the global electricity production in the future. Nuclear energy technology abroad. 2014, no.2, pp. 3-12 (in Russian).
3. Assessment of nuclear energy systems based of a closed nuclear fuel cycle with fast reactors. Report IAEA. January 2010, Wienna – TECDOC-1639.
4. The new program Rosatom. Periodical Strana «Rosatom» 19.03.2012 (in Russian).
5. «Rosatom» creates reactors running on spent fuel. Periodical Nuclear strategy 06.08.2012 (in Russian).
6. Gonchar N.I., Pankratov D.V. Characterization of LMC output polonium into the gas phase from the experimental data SSC RF-IPPE/Report on the conference: «Thermophysics-2013». – Obninsk, 2013 (in Russian).
7. Krjukov F.N., Nikitin O.N., Kuzmin S.V., Belyaeva A.V., Malceva E.B., Gilshutdinov I.F., Grin P.I. Condition nitride fuel after irradiation in fast reactors. Atomnaja Energija. 2012, v. 112, iss. 6, pp. 336-341.
8. Lopatkin A.V., Orlov V.V., Sili-Novitskii A.G., Filin A.M., Bibilishvili Yu.K., Rogozin B.D., Leontev B.F. Fuel cycles reactors BREST. Atomnaja Energija. 2000, v. 89, iss. 4, pp. 308–314.
9. Designing fast lead-cooled reactor (LFR): safety, neutron physics, thermal hydraulics, mechanical designs, fuel, reactor core design and installation. Novosti atomnoj nauki i tehniki. 08.10.2011, no. 225-228. Obninsk, IPPE Publ. (in Russian).
10. Safutin V., Zavidskii M., Kirsanov A. National service industry SNF. Jadernoe obshhestvo. 2000, no. 5-6, pp. 57-62 (in Russian).
11. Oka Y., Koshizuka S. Design Concept of Once-Through Cycle Supercritical-Pressure Light Water Cooled Reactors/Proceedinge of the First International Symposium on Supercritical Water-Cooled Reactors. – 6-9 Nov. 2000. – Tokyo, Japan.
12. Yetisir M., Gaudet M., Rhodes D. Development and Integration of Canadian SCWR Concept with Counter-Flow Fuel Assembly/ISSWCR-6. – 03-07 March 2013 – Shenzhen, China – Paper 13059.
13. Tian X., Tian W., Zhu D., Qiu S., Su G. A stability analysis of supercritical water-cooled reactor CSR-1000/ISSCWR-6. – 03-07 March 2013. – Shenzhen, China. – Paper 13044.
14. Zhang Peng, Wang Kan, Yu Ganglin Utilization of Different Fuel in Supercritical Fast Reactor/ISSCWR-6. – 03-07 March 2013. – Shenzhen, China. – Paper 13083.
15. Glebov A.P., Klushin A.V. Reactor with fast resonance spectrum cooled by water at supercritical pressure and two-pass coolant flow scheme. Atomnaja Energija. 2006, v. 100, iss. 5, pp. 349–355.
16. Ryjov S.B., Mokhov V.A., Nikitenko M.P. The concept of single-VVER-SKD with body reactor cooled by supercritical water/Report on the 5th International Symposium: ISSCWR-5. – 13-16 march 2011. – Vancouver, Canada.
17. Glebov A.P., Klushin A.V., Baranaev Yu.D., Kirillov P.L. Presearch of Features of U-Pu-Th Fuel Cycle and its use for Burning up of Minor Actinides in Supercritical Water-Cooled Reactor with Fast Neutron Spectrum/ICONE21. – 29 July-2 August 2013. – Chengdu, China. – P. 16888.
18. Baranaev Yu.D., Glebov A.P., Klushin A.V. Reactor core with fast-resonance neutron spectrum with supercritical water pressure. Patent for an invention № 2485612, 2013, RU 2 485 612 С1 (in Russian).