+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="02"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/01/02.pdf"
first_page="20"
last_page="27"
udc="621.039:62-622"
title="Nuclear power plant safety improvement by hydrogen technologies"
original_title="Повышение безопасности атомных электрических станций на основе водородных технологий"
authors=["AminovRZ", "YurinVE"]
tags=["emergency electricity supply", "hydrogen cycle", "combustion chamber", "nuclear power plant", "maneuverability", "safety", "reserve auxiliary of NPP", "nuclear emergency with blackou"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.02"

+++

An effective application of hydrogen technologies at nuclear power plants is proposed; it improves the plant maneuverability at normal operation, and secures own electricity needs in case of station black-out. Probabilistic assessment of the NPP’s emergency power supply reliability is conducted, under the station blackout condition and simultaneous use of the additional, permanently operating steam turbine and emergency power supply system with diesel generators.

The proposed system with additional steam turbine can use the core residual heating for shutdown cooling for the period of 72 hours. In case of blackout at a plant with several units, the additional steam turbine’s power is supported by additional steam, generated by hydrogen-oxygen combustion. It is found that the proposed scheme with a permanently-operating small-power additional steam turbine installed at NPP, in combination with the hydrogen facility, increases the emergency electric power supply reliability at station blackout accidents.

### References

1. Kejv L. Avarii na AES, svjazannye s prekrascheniem podachi elektroenergii na sobstvennye nuzhdy [Nuclear accident related to a power cut for own needs]. Atomnaja tehnika za rubezhom, 1991, no. 2, pp. 31-32.
2. Aminov R.Z., Egorov A.N., Yurin V.E. Sposob rasholazhivaniya vodo-ohlazhdaemogo reaktora pri polnom obestochivanii AES na osnove vodorodnogo cikla [Way to cooling down the water-cooled reactor with blackout NPP based on of the hydrogen cycle]. Patent RF №2499307, 2013 (in Russian).
3. Vladimirov V.I. Prakticheskie zadachi po ekspluatacii yadernyh reaktorov [Practical problems in the operation of nuclear reactors]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, pp. 190-194 (in Russian).
4. Aminov R.Z., Bajramov A.N., Yurin V.E. Sistema szhiganija vodoroda v cikle AJeS s regulirovaniem temperatury vodorod-kislorodnogo para [The system of hydrogen combustion cycle NPP with temperature control of hydrogen-oxygen pair]. Patent RF №2488903, 2013 (in Russian).
5. Aminov R.Z., Ignatov V.I. Methodological questions concerning safety assessment of nuclear power plants during loss of power and disruption of communications with the system. Atomic Energy, 2002, v. 92, no. 1, pp. 86-89.
6. Aminov R.Z. Vektornaja optimizacija rezhimov raboty elektrostancij [Vector optimization mode power]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1994, 320 p. (in Russian).
7. Aminov R.Z., Yurin V.E. Ocenka nadezhnosti jelektrosnabzhenija sobstvennyh nuzhd AES [Assessment of the reliability of auxiliary power supply nuclear power plants]. Materialy konkursa dokladov po jelektrojenergeticheskoj i jelektrotehnicheskoj tematikam molodezhnoj sekcii RNK SIGRE. Ivanovo, SIGRE Publ., April 2013, pp. 67-77 (in Russian).