+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="03"
file="/pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-03.pdf"
first_page="28"
last_page="38"
udc="621.039"
title="Analysis of the defectiveness of the welds of №111 PGV 1000 and proposal on their elimination"
original_title="Анализ поврежденных сварных швов №111 ПГВ-1000 и предложения по их устранению"
authors=["PovarovVP"]
tags=["discontinuity", "steam generator", "welded joint", "experimental studies"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.03"

+++

Reliability of planned and exploiting complex technical objects, such as AES – main condition of safety for the man and the environment. The basic factors, which influence reliability are:
– absence of errors in design and calculation of constructions, the correctness of the selection of materials and technology of production;
– quality of the materials used;
– quality of assembly and welding works;
– operating condition and operational control.

Despite the fact that with the design and the operation AES, clout is given to the guarantee of reliability, operating experience showed that in the welded joint of №111 PGV-1000M is possible crack formation. The mechanism of origin and increase in the cracks, until now, is not unambiguously determined.

In the article are represented the results of investigating the reasons for the damage of metal in the zone of the welded joint of № of 111 weldings of hot collector to the branch pipe Of du1200 of housing. The first case of the splitting of metal in the region of the connection of collector with the housing PG occurred in 1998 on 5 block Novovoronezh atomic station. Subsequently are discovered uniform damages even on several PG, which made it necessary to consider the cases of damage as the system problem, which has the general reasons.

To identify factors that lead to cracking, conducted a significant amount of R & d: analysis of the manufacture and properties of the metal; a detailed computational study of the stress state from operational factors; assessment of residual stresses from manufacturing techniques; experimental study of the stress state of the node models and the NPP; measurements and the analysis of the displacements of equipment RU with the thermal expansion; the determination of the critical dimension of cracks; the correction working of the working medium of secondary circuit; the exception of the thermo-shocks, connected with the work of the system of scavenging.

### References

1. Tehnicheskaya spravka TSAE AES OAO «VNIIAES» dlya soveschaniya-videokonferenсii konсerna Rosenergoatom 11.07.2013. Informaciya ob analogichnyh povtoryayuschihsya narusheniyah v rabote AES (k narusheniyu, proizoshedshemu 08.07.2013 na energobloke № 5 Novovoronezhskoj AES).[ Information similar repetitive NPP operational events -to a breach occurring July 08 2013 at power unit №5 Novovoronezh NPP)] (in Russian).
2. Tehnicheskij otchyot «Razrabotka, izgotovlenie, kalibrovka i otladka sistemy kompleksnogo monitoringa celostnosti metalla na osnovanii termodeformacionnoj nagruzhennosti zony karmana kollektora PG i momenta razvitiya defekta v zone SS №111 na polnomasshtabnom stende. Razrabotka tehnologii vypolneniya sbora dannyh sistemy kompleksnogo monitoringa termodeformacionnoj nagruzhennosti i momenta razvitiya treschiny (celostnosti) metalla korpusa PGV-1000 v zone svarnogo shva №111 privarki kollektora teplonositelya pervogo kontura k patrubku Du 1200» Technical report «Design, manufacture, calibration and debugging of complex monitoring system based on the integrity of the metal thermal loading of the deformation area pocket collector PG and since the development of a defect in the area of SS №111 on a full stand. Development of technology for performing data acquisition system integrated monitoring thermal deformation of loading and the date of the crack (integrity) of the metal body of PGV-1000 in the area of the weld welding №111 coolant reservoir 1-st loop to pipe DN 1200» ]. Moscow. OOO «NSUTS «TSMiR» Publ., 2011 (in Russian).
3. Akt № 149/2013-HC. Novovoronezhskaya AES. Rezul’taty kontrolya sostava otlozhenij, otobrannyh iz kol’cevogo zazora «goryachego» kollektora parogeneratora 5PG-1 v period PPR-2013.[ The results of monitoring of silt taken from the annular gap «hot» collector steam 5PG-1 during the PPR-2013 outage] (in Russian).
4. Roschektaev B.M. Vodno-himicheskij rezhim AES s reaktorami VVER-1000 i RBMK-1000. [Water-chemical mode of NPP with the reactors of VVER- 1000 and RBMK- 1000] Uchebnoe posobie. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2010. 132 p. (in Russian).
5. Shutikov A.V., Savchenko V.E., Vigranenko YU.M., Khrustalev V.A.. Puti sover-shenstvovaniya vodno-himicheskogo rezhima vtorogo kontura AES s VVER=1000. [Ways of perfection of the water-chemical mode of the second contour of NPP with VVER-1000 Izvestiya Tomskogo politehnicheskogo universiteta. 2008, v. 312, no 2 (in Russian).
6. Tehnicheskaya spravka №144/2013-HC o vypolnenii himicheskih promyvok PG
energobloka №5 NV AES (in Russian).
7. Otchyot ob ispytanii smyvnogo ustrojstva «karmanov» kollektorov parogeneratorov pri provedenii himicheskoj promyvki PG-1 bloka 5 Novovoronezhskoj AES. Kalininskij filial (KATE), 2006 (in Russian).
8. Trunov N.B., Kharchenko S.A., Korotaev N.F., Lyakishev S.L. Rezul’taty rabot po issledovaniyu prichin povrezhdeniya metalla v rajone svarnogo shva privarki kollektora pervogo kontura k korpusu parogeneratora i razrabotka kompensiruyuschich meropriyatij. [ Results of works on research of reasons of damage of metal in the district of the weld-fabricated guy-sutures of welding on of collector of the first contour to the corps of steam generator and development of compensative events]. Podol’sk. OAO OKB «Gidropress» Publ. (in Russian).
9. Kharchenko. S.A., Trunov N.B., Denisov V.V., Korotaev N.F., Analiz prichin povrezhdeniya metalla v zone svarnogo shva №111 parogeneratorov PGV-1000m. [Analysis of reasons of damage of metal in the zone of the weld-fabricated guy-sutures №111 steam generator PGV-1000M]/ Podol’sk. FGUP OKB «Gidropress» Publ. (in Russian).
10. Bakirov M.B., Levchuk V.I., Povarov V.P., Gromov A.F. Analiz prichin poyavleniya neproektnyh termosilovyh vozdejstvij v zone cvarnogo soedineniya №111-1 PGV-1000M i rekomendacii po ih isklyucheniyu. [Analysis reasons of appearance of unproject thermo power influences in the area of weld-fabricated connection № 111-1 PGV-1000M and recommendations on their exception . Teploenergetika. 2014, no 8, p. 3.
11. Verezemskij V.G. Ustalostnaya versiya obrazovaniya treschin v metalle zony SS №111 mezhdu kollektorami i patrubkami korpusa PGV-1000. [Fatigue cracking version of SS in metal between №111 the collectors and pipes corps PGV-1000]. Otchyot VNIIAES. Osnovnye raboty, vypolnennye v 2011g. Moscow. VNIIAES Publ., 2011 (in Russian).
12. Zaklyuchenie CNIITMASh ot 30.08.2001g. O prichinah razrusheniya uzla soedineniya kollektora s PG VVER-1000. Moscow. CNIITMASh Publ., 2001 (in Russian).