+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/01/04.pdf"
first_page="39"
last_page="44"
udc="519.688"
title="The software to test components of the integrated security systems of NPP of different developers on the integration"
original_title="Специализированное программное обеспечение для проверки компонентов интегрированных систем безопасности АЭС различных производителей на возможность интеграции"
authors=["BezuglovDY", "TrofimovMA"]
tags=["Physical security", "Integrated security system", "the industry standard", "automated facility", "network traffic", "standardized protocols", "machine States", "specialized software"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.04"

+++

Physical protection of nuclear power plants provide an Integrated security system. Often the integration is reduced to developed specific solutions for interoperability between products from the same developer. In 2009, the standard was instituted JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» STO 1.1.1.04.007.0814-2009. The aim of this standard is the solution to the problem of compatibility of the products of different developers.

Compliance with this standard is confirms by certification. The automated stand and specialized software «AtomTest» was developing with the execution of works on certification. The program is working on the principle of the proxy server. The mechanism retransmission communication through standardized protocols between software components of the integrated security systems had been developing.

According to the test plan «AtomTest» connects, user notification, the expectation criteria continue, then you change the port number and, if available, the IP address set in the configuration bench computer, interception of messages circulating between software components, and substitute them in meaningful information.

When testing the program is providing: scan network traffic for compliance with UTF-8 encoding, syntax, and semantics of XML, XSD schema build commands and command sequences.

After testing the program is analyzing event log, with subsequent reporting format.html and .pdf then print. The steps are performed automatically without operator intervention.

According to the results of work performed six developers has gained certificates of compliance. This suggests the possibility of integration of components, integrated systems from different developers. It should also be noted the importance of further work in this direction.

### References

1. Sevryukov D.V., Asfandiyarov A.H. The safety of nuclear and radiation facilities. Bezopasnost’ okruzhayuschej sredy. 2007, no. 3, pp. 12-18 (in Russian).
2. Zwierzynski S. The problem of choice of perimeter detection equipment. Part 1. Bezopasnost’. Dostovernost’. Informaciya. 2002, no. 4 (44). (in Russian).
3. Garcia M. Design and evaluation of physical protection systems. Moscow. Mir, LLC «Izdatelstvo AST» Publ., 2003. 386 p. (in Russian).
4. Magauenov RG Alarm system: basic theory and principles of construction. Moscow. «Goryachaya Liniya – Telecom» Publ., 2004. 367 p. (in Russian).
5. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» Standard SRT 1.1.1.04.007.0814-2009 «Collection system, and addressing complex information-processing engineering systems of physical protection of nuclear power plants». Technical requirements. Enacted by the order of JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» № 1782 from 17.12.2009 (in Russian).
6. Omel’yanchuk А.М. Standarty na integrirovannye sistemy bezopasnosti – vzglyad razrabotchika. Chast’ 2 [Standards for integrated security systems – Developer’s view. Part 2]. Security systems. 2006, no. 1. pp. 116-120 (in Russian). Available at: http://www.secuteck.ru/articles2/kompleks_sys_sec/standarty_na_integrirovannye_sist/
7. Krahmalyov А.К. Eschyo raz ob integracii system bezopasnosti [Exe times on the integration of security systems] Sec.Ru. 26.05.2014 (in Russian). Available at: http://daily.sec.ru/2014/05/26/Esheraz-ob-integratsii-sistem-bezopasnosti.html