+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="05"
file="pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-05.pdf"
first_page="45"
last_page="55"
udc="621.039.534.6"
title="Self-organizing carbon nitride coatings on steel from molten lead-magnesium eutectic"
original_title="Самоорганизующееся карбонитридное покрытие на стали из расплавленной эвтектики свинец-магний"
authors=["OrlovaEA", "OrlovYuI", "KryuchkovEA", "KomyshnyjVN", "ZhmurinVG", "ZagrebaevSA", "KotovskijNA", "DvorcevojVG"]
tags=["lead, magnesium", "zirconium nitride", "fuel element sublayer", "corrosion protection"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.05"

+++

The best way to solve the problem of compatibility of a liquid metal sublayer with fuel element cladding in the presence of nitride fuel is to provide spontaneous formation of a zirconium nitride coating on the steel surface in lead eutectic with a ratio of 2,25% wt. (0,164 nuclear shares) magnesium to 0,2% wt. zirconium. Self-curing of accidental damage to the cladding is thus provided. Corrosion damage and changes in the mass of 16Cr12WMoSiVNbB and Cr13Mo2Si2 steel samples were absent during 50-500 h their ampoule and loopback tests at a temperature of 873-1023 K. To in an eutectic of 2,25% of Mg-0,2 of % of Zr, with the rest being Pb, and also after tests at 973 K during 5700 h with a truncated model of the fuel element with uranium nitride core, a heat-transmitting underlayer of a specified structure and 16Cr12WMoSiVNbB steel cladding, with the covering previously created on it from zirconium nitride. 

On the basis of pilot studies it is possible to recommend the use of the eutectic Pb-Mg alloy rich in zirconium as a liquid-metal sublayer in fuel elements with nitride fuel.

A working site has been developed to study the formation of nitride and (ore) carbide cover from eutectic Pb-Mg alloy in the narrow gap between coaxial tubes. Trial tests have been conducted.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Orlov V.V., Smirnov V.S. Progress in lead cooled fast reactor design, in: Proc. Intern. Conf. on Design and Safety of Advanced Nuclear Power Plants. Tokyo, Japan, Oct.25-29. 1992, v. 2, paper №16-6, pp. 1-4.
2. Beljaeva A.V., Krjukov F.N., Nikitin O.N., Kuzmin S.V., Malcseva E.B. The main results of uranium-plutonium nitride fuel after irradiation in BOR-60, in Sb. dokl. Mezhdun. nauchn.-tehn. konf. «Innovacionnye produkty i tehnologii jadernoj jenergetiki (ISTC NIKIET-2012)» [Proceedings of the ISTC «Innovative products and technology of nuclear power»], 27-29 November 2012. Moscow, JSC «NIKIET» Publ., 2012, pp. 223-228 (in Russian). .
3. Orlov V.V., Orlova E.A., Cikunov V.S., Bozin S.N., Bashkin A.V. Formation of protective nitride coatings on steel surfaces: preprint № ET-08/77. Moskow, JSC «NIKIET» Publ., 2008 (in Russian).
4. Orlova E.A., Gurbich A.F., Molodcov S.L., Orlov V.V., Bozin S.N., Bashkin A.V. The Formation and Investigation of Protective Coatings on the Ferrite – Martensite Steel Surface, which are Compatible with Nitrogen Fuel. Atomic Energy. 2008, v. 105, iss. 5, pp. 269-274 (in Russian).
5. Orlov V.V., Leonov V.N., Orlova E.A. A method of forming a protective coating on the metal surface. Patent RF 2439203, 10.01.12. Bul. № 1 (in Russian).
6. Orlova E.A., Bukin E.A. Formation of carbonitride coatings on steel [electronic resource], in: Sb. dokl. na mezhvedomstvennom seminare «Tjazhyolye zhidkometallicheskie teplonositeli v bystryh reaktorah» [Proceedings of interagency workshop «Heavy liquid metal cooled fast reactors»] 20-22 October 2010. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2010, pp. 406-414 (CD-ROM) (in Russian).
7. Orlova E.A., Orlov Ju.I., Krjuchkov E.A., Komyshnyj V.N., Egorov V.S., Zhmurin V.G., Dvorcevoj V.G., Zagrebaev S.A., Kolosov K.V. Self-organized carbon nitride coating on steel from molten eutectic lead-magnesium, in: Sb. dokl. mezhdunar. nauchno-tehn. konf. «Innovacionnye proekty i tehnologii jadernoj jenergetiki (ISTC NIKIET-2012)» [Proceedings of the ISTC «Innovative products and technology of nuclear power»], 27-29 November 2012. Moscow, JSC «NIKIET» Publ., 2012, pp. 174-182. (in Russian).