+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="08"
file="pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-08.pdf"
first_page="76"
last_page="86"
udc="621.039.53; 537.9"
title="Dielectric monitors of the high-dose and high-temperature reactor irradiation"
original_title="Диэлектрические мониторы условий высокодозного и высокотемпературного реакторного облучения"
authors=["StepanovVA", "IsaevEI", "KrukovaLM", "PlaksinOA", "StepanovPA", "ChernovVM"]
tags=["radiation material science", "reactor irradiation", "dielectrics", "structural studies", "optical studies", "temperature monitor", "dose monitor"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.08"

+++

Radiation-induced changes of the structure of oxide and nitride dielectric materials and their properties are investigated. The use of high-temperature dielectric materials as temperature monitors

To determine the conditions of high temperature and high-dose irradiation of materials in the areas of asset of nuclear reactors is an important and urgent task of experimental radiative-insulating materials science. Such monitoring is particularly important for power reactors, in which the local irradiation conditions of materials (temperature, dose) or defined-payment methods (for a given reactor power, neutron and gamma-ray spectra, heat transfer, etc.) Or passive methods using different radiation monitors , made of special materials. Studies of radiation changes in the structure, properties and isotopic composition monitors let you receive the characteristics of the conditions (dose, temperature) irradiation.

In this paper, we substantiate the possibility of using high-dielectric-metallic materials as monitors annealing conditions of exposure in a wide range of rate and doses. Method for determination of in-core irradiation conditions based on the study of radiation-induced changes in the structure and related physical properties of dielectricians after irradiation.

Radiation induced changes of structure and physical properties of oxide and nitride dielectric materials are investigated. High-temperature dielectric materials as temperature monitors during testing of materials in the nuclear reactor are proposed. It is experimentally shown that the use of single-crystal Al2O3 and BN ceramics allows to determine the temperature of the radiation in the range from 370 to 1900 K. The temperature of testing is determined by measuring the intensity of the optical absorption or line shifts in X-ray spectra of the irradiated materials after annealing. We discuss the possibility of the gamma dose detecting by measuring the intensity of the optical absorption and luminescence of F-centers of irradiated Al2O3 single crystals, the neutron dose too, – by measuring the isotopic composition of BN materials.

### References

1. Stepanov. V.A., Chernov V.M. Radiation-induced processes and their influence on the functional properties of dielectrics for different types of irradiation. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2000, v. 283-287, pp. 932-936.
2. Plaksin O.A., Stepanov V.A., Stepanov P.A., Chernov V.M., Skuratov V.A., Krukova L.M., Polyakov A.M. Structural transformations and properties deterioration of dielectric materials under irradiation. Plasma Devices and Operations. 1996, v. 4, pp. 325-335.
3. Chernov V.M., Belyakov V.A., Bryuzgin A.M., Cherednichenko Y.Gr., Ievleva J.I., Khorasanov G.L., Plaksin O.A., Stepanov V.A., Vizgalov A.V., Zherebtsov V.A., Zrodnikov A.V. Investigation on radiation-induced processes in dielectric materials. J. Nucl. Mater. 1996, v. 233-237, pp. 1304-1309.
4. Plaksin O.A. and Stepanov V.A.Radiation-Induced Electrical and Optical Processes in the Materials Based on Al2O3. Optika i spektroskopija. 2001, v. 90, no. 4, pp. 542–551 (in Russian).
5. Stepanov V.A., Stepanov P.A. Kolebatel’naya spektroskopiya materialov iz grafitopodobnogo nitrida bora. Optika i spektroskopija. 1995, v. 78, no. 3, pp. 431-435 (in Russian).
6. Lopatin V.V., Ivanov Yu.I., Dedkov V.S. Nanostructured Mater. 1994, v. 4, p. 669.
7. Perfilov S.A., Stepanov V.A., Rusanova L.N., Kuznecova V.F. Issledovanie grafitopodobnogo nitrida bora metodom IK-spektroskopii. Poroshkovaja metallurgija. 1991, no. 2, pp.72-73 (in Russian).
8. Sharupin B.N. In «Himicheskoe gazofaznoe osazhdenie tugoplavkih materialov». Leningrad, GIPH Publ., 1976, pp. 66-101 (in Russian).
9. Buzhinskij O.I., Opimach I.V., Kabyshev A.V. J. Nucl. Mater. 1990, v. 173, p. 179.
10. Dedkov V.S., Ivanov Ju.S., Lopatin V.V., Sharupin B.N. Osobennosti stroenija piroliticheskogo nitrida bora. Kristallografija. 1993, v. 38, no. 2, pp. 217-221 (in Russian).
11. Fabelinskij I. L. Molekuljarnoe rassejanie sveta. Moscow. Vysshaja Shkola Publ., 1965, 512 p. (in Russian).