+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="09"
file="pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-09.pdf"
first_page="87"
last_page="91"
udc="62.799:621.039.003"
title="Flexible distributed control and protection system for industrial objects power consumers"
original_title="Гибкая распределенная система управления и защиты конечных потребителей электроэнергии промышленных объектов"
authors=["AlontcevaEN", "BelousovPA"]
tags=["nuclear power plant", "auxiliary power consumption", "distribution", "consumer", "industrial object", "control and protection system", "software"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.09"

+++

The problem of energy efficiency and conservation is important for our country. The solution is the development of intelligent systems for accounting and management of energy resources. The task of forecasting and optimal planning of auxiliary power consumption for nuclear power plant is also important to improve economic efficiency. The auxiliary power consumption specified set of consumers of electricity for the operation of nuclear power plant equipment and administrative buildings. The approach for forecasting systems of the auxiliary power consumption not exist. Improving forecast accuracy is possible due to the accumulation of information about consumers of electricity.

An approach to the construction of systems based on the concept of smart grids with a specific set of hardware and software to optimize the energy consumption and redistribute power, to quickly change the characteristics of the electrical network. Power control devices are installed at the location of the sockets. Devices send and receive data through the PLC network to the server. The server accumulate and stores information. The server is equipped with special software. The user through a web browser through a communications network has access to information analysis and management of power control devices. The system has scalability through the use of standard power control devices and flexibility through a combination of different data transmission technologies.

### References

1. Energeticheskaya strategiya Rossii na period do 2030 goda. Rasporyazeniye Pravitelstva RF ot 13.11.2009 №1715-р [Russian Energy Strategy for the period up to 2030. Order of the Government of the Russian Federation] (in Russian).
2. Ledin S.S. Koncepciya «elektroenergiya-tovar» kak katalizator razvitiya Smart Grid [The concept of «electricity - goods» as a catalyst for the development of Smart Grid]. Automation in industry (electronic journal). 2012, no. 4 (in Russian).
3. Churkin Y.G., Sidorov Y.B., Belousov P.A., Alontceva E.N. Ustrojstvo upravleniya elektropitaniem potrebiteley elektricheskoy energii [Power control device for electricity consumers]. Patent RF, no. 148507, 2014 (in Russian).
4. Churkin Y.G., Sidorov Y.B., Belousov P.A., Mozaev Y.A., Alontceva E.N. Smart Energy. Base Soft. Certificate to computer program RF no. 2014616602, 2014 (in Russian).
5. Churkin Y.G., Sidorov Y.B., Belousov P.A., Fomin A.I., Alontceva E.N. Smart Energy. Control Soft. Certificate to computer program RF no. 2014660141, 2014 (in Russian).