+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:14:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/01/10.pdf"
first_page="92"
last_page="102"
udc="621.039"
title="Combined numerical and experimental researches of temperature pulsations of collector unit fragment of heat exchanger clean-up and cooldown power nuclear unit systems"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальное исследование термопульсаций фрагмента коллекторного узла теплообменника системы очистки и расхолаживания водо-водяных реакторов"
authors=["DmitrievSM", "RyazapovRR", "SobornovAE", "KotinAV", "MamaevAV"]
tags=["heat-exchange", "temperature state", "temperature pulsations", "coolant", "collector unit", "CFD"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.10"

+++

An experimental model of collector unit fragment of heat-exchanger clean-up and cooldown power nuclear unit systems has been designed and manufactured. Experimental researches of temperature state have been carried out with the use of a given experimental model.

Experimental temperature dispersions in characteristic zones of collector unit under investigation have been obtained. Most thermally high-stress zones of heat-exchange surface have been determined.

Researches of intensity temperature pulsations of heat-exchange surface and coolant flow in different zones has been carried out. Static and spectral characteristics of temperature pulsations have been presented. Solutions focused on degradation of intensity temperature pulsations have been proposed.

Computation model of collector unit fragment of heat=exchanger has beendeveloped. Computation models construction recommendations have been given. Results of numerical simulation transient temperature state and characteristics of temperature pulsations at the different regimes of flow of model using CFD= code ANSYS CFX 14. 0. have been presented.

Comparative analysis of experimental and computation data has been carried out. It has demonstrated that computation data are as experimental data with adequate accuracy that allows to use constructed computation data at a further substantiation heat-exchanger construction.

### References

1. Sudakov A. V. Pulsations of temperature and electrical equipment‘s component life. Leningrad. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 179 p. (in Russian).
2. Sudakov A. V. Voltages at temperature pulsations. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1980. 64 p. (in Russian).
3. Budov V. M. Forced heat exchangers of water cooled nuclear power unit. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989. 174 p. (in Russian).
4. Ryazapov R. R. et al. Experimental investigation of transient temperature state and characteristics of temperature pulsations of collector unit fragment of heat-exchanger nuclear power unit. Proceeding of NSTU n.a. R. E. Alekseev. Nizhny Novgorod, NSTU n.a. R.E. Alekseev Publ., 2013, no. 4 (101), pp. 206-212 (in Russian).
5. ANSYS CFX-Pre User’s Guide ANSYS, Inc. Release 14.0. 2011.
6. Kozelkov A.S. et al. Mathematical models and algorithms for service simulating test of hydrodynamics and aerodynamics tasks: work book. Nizhny Novgorod, NSTU n.a. R.E. Alekseev Publ., 2014. 164 p. (in Russian).
7. Snegirev A.Y. High performance computing in Applied Physics. Numerical simulation of turbulent flows: work book. St.-Petersburg. Politehnicheskij Universitet Publ. 2009.143 p. (in Russian).
8. Menter F.R. Best Practice: Scale-Resolving Simulations in ANSYS CFD Version 11.0. ANSYS Germany GmbH, 2012. 70 p.