+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="/pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-11.pdf"
first_page="103"
last_page="110"
udc="621.039.533"
title="Study of functional characteristics for safety system check valve using scaled model"
original_title="Исследование функциональных характеристик обратного клапана системы безопасности на масштабной модели"
authors=["BaluyevDE", "GusevDV", "MeshkovSI", "NikanorovOL", "OsipovSL", "RogozhkinSA", "RukhlinSV", "ShepelevSF"]
tags=["liquid metal cooled reactor", "safety system", "check valve", "hydro-dynamic force", "similarity criteria", "check valve model", "test facility"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.11"

+++

The paper provides results of experimental scale model studies on functional characteristics of a check valve used in the safety system of a liquid-metal-cooled reactor. The proposed check valve design with a hollow ball as a blocking element has a number of substantial advantages compared with the most widely spread valves with disc-type flaps used as blocking elements. The advantages are valve operation independent of functioning of other safety systems and absence of friction pairs. The need to conduct experimental studies is determined both by the novelty of the proposed check valve design and by absence of verified computational validation methods for functioning of this type of valves. In this connection, the paper presents a computational validation method for fluid-dynamic parameters of the proposed check valve design and similitude parameters describing fluid-dynamic characteristics of the check valve – numeric values of the similitude parameters were obtained in the course of calculations made by the ANSYS-CFX commercial fluid-dynamic code. The paper describes the experimental model of the check valve with two alternative options of the blocking element – one in the form of a hollow ball in a support bowl; and another one, in the form of a semi-sphere on a guide rod going through the support sleeve on the valve spindle. Provided is a brief description of the test facility. Check valve model fluid-dynamic characteristics obtained in the course of experimental studies are shown in diagrams as functions of some design and operation parameters of the model.

### References

1. Zaryugin D.G., Poplavskij V.M., Rachkov V.I., Sorokin A.P., Shvetsov Y.E., Rogozhkin S.A., Shepelev S.F. Experiment-calculated justification of design system of emergency heat removal BN-1200 // Atomic Energy. 2014, v. 116, iss. 4., pp. 222–228 (in Russian).
2. Fast reactor database. IAEA-TECDOC-866, Vienna, 1996.
3. Fast breeder reactors: experience and trends. Proceedings of an international symposium on fast breeder reactors: experience and future trends organized by the International Atomic Energy Agency and held in Lyons, 22-26 July 1985, v.2, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 1986.
4. Ionatis R.R. Novikov A.I. Issledovanie gidrodinamicheskogo avariinogo ustroistva. V sb. «Gidroavtomatika». Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1965 (in Russian).
5. Gukhman А.А. Introduction in the theory of similarity. Moscow, Vysshaya Shkola Publ., 1963 (in Russian).
6. Shlikhting H. The theory of a boundary layer. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1974 (in Russian).
7. Vieser W., Esch T., Menter F., Smirnov P. Heat transfer predictions using advanced two-equation turbulence models, CFX Validation report, ANSYS Inc., 2008.