+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:11:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="13"
file="/pdf/2015/01/2015-01-article-13.pdf"
first_page="119"
last_page="127"
udc="621.039.735"
title="Influence of inorganic ligands on effectiveness of radioactive waste ion-exchange processing"
original_title="Влияние неорганических лигандов на эффективность ионообменной переработки радиоактивных отходов"
authors=["ChugunovAS", "RumyantsevAV", "VinnitskiyVA", "NechaevAF"]
tags=["liquid radwaste", "ion exchange", "complexation", "inorganic ligands"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.13"

+++

Liquid radioactive wastes generated in various fields of nuclear science and technology, generally contain salts of mineral acids, which concentration can exceed by several orders of magnitude the concentration of radioactive polyvalent metal ions. Thus, formation of metal cations and acid anions complexes is possible. To evaluate the effect of inorganic ligands on the cation’s sorption characteristics, the method of elution of metal ions (cobalt, magnesium) from cation exchanger with sodium was applied. The dependence of the retention time of polyvalent metal ions by Dowex-50х8 on the Leden’s function has been investigated. It is proved that the ligands of mineral acids can have a noticeable effect on the cation exchange efficiency. It is established that the forming multivalent complexes have larger impact to the ion exchanger sorption behavior, as compared to the neutral complexes, despite the stability value of the multivalent complexes is at least the order of magnitude less than that of the neutral complexes.

Some practical methods to minimize the impact of inorganic ligands on the ion-exchange effectiveness are suggested.

### References

1. Nechaev A.F., Chugunov A.S. Motivation and possibility for reducing the volume of radwastes. Atomic energy. 2014, v. l. 115, iss. 6, pp. 386-390.
2. Stahiv M.R. Kompleks pererabotki zhidkih radioaktivnyh othodov (KP ZhRO) Kol’skoj AJeS. Osnovnye itogi ekspluatacii [Complex for processing of liquid radioactive waste (LRW TC) Kola NPP. Main results of operantion]. Sbornik tezisov MNTK*2010 [Book of abstracts IRTC-2010]. Moscow, 2010, pp. 287-289 (in Russian).
3. Chugunov A.S., Nechaev A.F., Dmitriev S.A., Lifanov F.A., Shibkov S.N. Pererabotka vysokosolevyh borsoderzhaschih zhidkih radioaktivnyh othodov [Processing of high-salted boron liquid radwaste]. Voprosy materialovedenija, 1997, 5(11), pp.15-21 (in Russian).
4. Tchugunov A.S., Nechaev A.F. Treatment of liquid radwaste with enhancedconcentrations of organics. Proc. of the 8th Intern. Conf. ICEM’01. N.Y., 2001, pp.34.
5. Tchugunov A.S., Nechaev A.F., Shibkov S.N., Dmitriev S.A., Lifanov F.A. Processing of high-salted low and intermediate levels liquid radioactive waste: first principles of technology organization and experimental substantiation. Proc. Intern. Conf. on radioactive waste management and environmental remediation ICEM’97. N.Y., 1997, pp. 503-505.
6. Tchugunov A.S., Nechaev A.F. Jelektrostimulirovannaja destrukcija organicheskih komponentov ZhRO: motivacija raboty i sut’ metoda [Electro-stimulated destruction of the organic components of liquid radioactive waste: the motivation of the work and the essence of the method]. Sb. trudov NTK «Nauchno-innovacionnoe sotrudnichestvo» [Coll. STC works «Scientific innovation cooperation»]. Moscow, 2002, pp.32-33 (in Russian).
7. Arhipov O.P., Brykov S.I., Sirjapina L.A., Kashirin R.A., Petrov A.Ju., Sal’nikov A.A., Hro-movskih E.V., Zhukov A.G., Vaver G.A., Kutdjusov Ju.F., Bud’ko I.O., Makarcev A.N., Rusakova M.V., Kozlov V.Ja. Rezul’taty himicheskih promyvok parogeneratorov na Volgodonskoj AES pered PPR-2005 i PPR-2006 [The results of chemical cleaning of steam generators at the Volgodonsk nuclear power plant before PPM-2005 and PPM-2006]. Sbornik trudov VII Mezhdunarodnogo seminarf po gorizontal’nym parogeneratoram [Collection of works. 7th International Workshop on horizontal steam generators]. Podol’sk, 2006. (in Russian).
8. Martell A.E., Smith R.M. Critical Stability Constants. Vol. 4 –6; New York: Plenum, 1976, 1982, 1989.
9. Tchugunov A.S., Nechaev A.F. Osobennosti problemy «obezvrezhivanija» radioaktivnyh koncentratov atomnyh jelektrostancij i puti ee reshenija [Features of the problem of «decontamination» of nuclear power plants radioactive concentrates and its solutions]. Izvestiya SPbGTI(TU), 2011, no.10 (36), pp. 32-38 (in Russian).
10. Kostrikin Ju.M., Meshherskij N.A., Korovina O.V. Vodopodgotovka i vodnyj rezhim jenergo-ob’ektov nizkogo i srednego davlenija. Spravochnik [Water and water regime of power facilities low and medium pressure. Directory]. Moscow, Jenergoatomizdat. 1990. 248 p.
11. Goronovskij I.T, Nazarenko Ju.P., Nekrjach E.F. Kratkij spravochnik po himii [A brief guide to chemistry]. Kiev. Naukova Dumka Publ., 1987. 828 p. (in Russian).
12. SanPiN 2.6.1.2523-09 «Normy radiacionnoj bezopasnosti (NRB*99/2009)» [Radiation Safety Standards (RSS-99/2009)].
13. Poljanskij N.G., Gorbunov G.V., Poljanskaja N.L. Metody issledovanija ionitov [Methods of investigation of ion exchangers]. Moscow. Chemistry Publ., 1976. 208 p. (in Russian).
14. GOST 10398-76. Reagents and super pure substances. Complexonometric method for determination of basic matter content. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2008 (in Russian).
15. Vasil’ev V.P. Termodinamicheskie svojstva rastvorov elektrolitov [Thermodynamic properties of electrolyte solutions]. Moscow. Vysshaja shkola Publ., 1982. 320 p. (in Russian).
16. Marhol M. Ionoobmenniki v analiticheskoj himii [Ion exchangers in analytical chemistry]. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1985 (in Russian).