+++

categories="article"
date="2015-04-04T01:06:53+03:00"
issue="2015-01"
issue_name="2015 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="18"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/01/18.pdf"
first_page="157"
last_page="162"
udc="621.039"
title="Neutron leakage spectra from PB-LI sphere with central 252CF- and 14 MEV-neutron sources and verification of evaluated neutron data"
original_title="Спектры нейтронов утечки из PB-LI-сферы c 252CF- и 14 МЭВ-источниками нейтронов в центре и тестировка оцененных нейтронных данных"
authors=["BlokhinAI", "ZhuravlevBV", "TalalaevVA", "SipachevIV"]
tags=["uneutron spectrum", "time-of-flight method", "ionization chamber with 252Cf neutron source", "scintillation detector of neutrons", "verification of evaluated neutron data"]
rubric = "physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.18"

+++

The leakage neutron spectra from Pb83Li17 sphere with 252Cf neutron source at its center have been measured by the time-of-flight method from 200 keV up to 10 MeV. Outer radius of sphere was 200 mm, inner – 60 mm. The measurements was performed with use of a specially designed fast ionization chamber, supplied the stop pulses for the time-of-flight technique as well as total number of 252Cf disintegrations during the experiment. The neutrons leaking from the outer surface of a sphere were detected with a scintillation counter composed of a paraterphenyl crystal of 5 cm in diameter and 5 cm long and FEU-143 photomultiplier tube. Before the measurements of leakage neutron spectrum from the same Pb-Li sphere were performed with 14 MeV neutron source using the same time-of-flight facility [1]. The measured data were compared with the MCNP-4 Monte-Carlo code calculations with nuclear data processed from the ENDF/B-VII.1 and BROND-3 libraries.

### References

1. Simakov S.P., Devkin B.V., M.G. Kobozev, V.A. Talalaev. FENDL NEUTRONICS BENCHMARK: Neutron leakage spectra from Be, Fe, Pb, PbLi shells with 14 MeV neutron source. Report IAEA INDC(NDS)-313 (1994), pp.1-16.
2. Zhuravlev B.V., Blokhin A.I., Kobozev M.G., Talalaev V.A. Measurements of leakage neutron spectra from thick spherical shells of vanadium and lead with 14 MeV neutrons and validation of their nuclear data. Proceedings of the XI International Seminar on Interaction of Neutrons with Nuclei (ISINN-XI, Dubna, May 28-31, 2003), Dubna, JINR, 2004, pp.188-195.
3. Devkin B.V., Fischer U., Kappler F., Kobozev M.G., von Mollendorff U., SimakovS.P. Evaluation of corrections for spherical-shell neutron transmission experiments by the Monte-Carlo technique. VANT, ser. Nuclear constants, iss. 1-2. 1997, pp. 38-44.
4. Briesmeister J.F. (Ed.). MCNP-4 General Monte-Carlo N-Particle Transport Code. Version 4B, Report LA-12625-M (1997).
5. MacFarlane R.E., Muir D.W. The NJOY Nuclear Data Processing System, Version 94.66, LANL (USA) (1996).