+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="21"
udc="621.039.52.034.6"
title="Lead-Bismuth Cooled Reactors: History of Development and Prospects for Evolution. Part 2: Prospects for Evolution"
original_title="Свинцово-висмутовые реакторы: история создания и перспективы развития. Часть 2. Перспективы развития"
authors=["TroyanovVM", "ToshinskyGI", "StepanovVS", "PetrochenkoVV"]
tags=["lead-bismuth coolant", "reactor", "steam generator", "safety", "core", "nuclear power"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.01"

+++

The main provisions of the concept of a civilian reactor facility (SVBR-100) that meet the requirements for Generation IV nuclear technologies, which is being developed on the basis of a critically analyzed experience in the development and operation of RFs with lead-bismuth coolant (LBC), are presented. The current status of the project and the prospects for the use of such RFs in nuclear power (NP) after demonstrating their reliability and safety in the operating conditions of an experimental-industrial power unit (EIPU) are presented.

The characteristic features of this reactor facility are a high level of inherent self-protection, which deterministically excludes the causes of the most severe accidents requiring the evacuation of the population. This is due to the natural properties of LBC, a very high boiling temperature and chemical inertness in contact with water and air, which are possible in case of a breach of the tightness of the circuits.

The selected capacity of 100 MW(e) provides the possibility of transporting the reactor monoblock in factory readiness by various modes of transport, including by rail, which reduces the construction term. On the other hand, at a given power level (reactor dimensions), the core breeding ratio by using the MOX fuel can be higher than unity. At the same time, in a closed nuclear fuel cycle, the reactor will operate in the fuel self-supply mode, which will become important when the resources of cheap natural uranium are exhausted.

### References

1. Ignatenko Ye.I., Zrodnikov A.V., Toshinsky G.I., Komlev O.G., Dragunov Yu.G., Stepanov V.S., Krushelnitsky V.N., Vikin V.A. Renovation of the «Old» NPP Units as a Way to Increase Cost Effectiveness of Nuclear Power. Proc. of the GLOBAL 2005, Tsukuba, Japan, Oct 9(13, 2005, Paper No. 276.
2. Zrodnikov A.V., Toshinsky G.I., Komlev O.G., Dragunov Yu.G., Stepanov V.S., Klimov N.N., Kopytov I.I., Krushelnitsty V.N. Nuclear Power Development in Market Conditions with Use of Multi-Purpose Modular Fast Reactors SVBR-75/100. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2006, v. 236, pp. 1490-1502; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2006.04.005 .
3. Dzangobegov V.V., Stepanov V.S., Dedul, A.V., Klimov N.N., Bolvanchikov S.N., Vahrooshin M.P. Reactor Facility SVBR-100 for Modular-Type Small-and-Medium Power Nuclear Power Plants. Proceeding of the IV Conference «Heavy Liquid-Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC-2013)», September 23-26, 2013. Paper no. 10, v. 1, pp. 77-86. Obninsk. GNTs RF – FEI, 2014 (in Russian).
4. Zrodnikov A.V., Toshinsky G.I., Komlev O.G., Melnikov K.G., Novikova N.N. Fuel Cycle for Reactor SVBR-100. Journal of Material Science and Engineering B1. 2011, pp. 929-937.
5. Novikova N.N., Komlev O.G., Toshinsky G.I. Neutronic and Physical Characteristics of Reactor SVBR-75/100 with Different Types of Fuel. Proc. of the ICAPP’06, Reno, NV USA, June 4-8, 2006, Paper no. 6355.
6. Bolhovitinov V.N., Pankratov D.V., Yefimov Ye.I., Levanov V.I., Toshinsky G.I., Ryabaya L.D. Assessment of Radiation Consequences Caused by Large Tightness Failure in the Primary Circuit Gas System of RF SVBR-75/100 with Simultaneous Coolant Heating up to 600°C. Proc. of the IIIrd Conference Heavy-Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (HLMC(2003) within the Frameworks of Russian Scientific and Technical Forum on Nuclear Fast Neutron Reactors, Dec. 4(12, 2003, Paper No. 2203,CD-ROM. Obninsk. GNTs RF – FEI, 2003 (in Russian)
7. NEVER AGAIN: An Essential Goal for Nuclear Safety. Available at: http://www.thehindu.com/news/resources/article1682986.ece (accessed Sep. 14, 2011).
8. Advanced Nuclear Plant Design Options to Cope with External Events. IAEA-TECDOC-1487. Vienna: IAEA, February 2006.
9. Forsberg С., Weinberg A. Advanced Reactors, Passive Safety and Acceptance of Nuclear Energy. Annual Review of Energy. 1990, v. 15, pp. 133-152; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.eg.15.110190.001025 .
10. INPRO Methodology for Sustainability Assessment of Nuclear Energy Systems: Safety of Nuclear Reactors. IAEA-TECDOC-1902. Vienna. IAEA, 2020. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE-1902web.pdf (accessed Sep. 14, 2011).
11. Toshinsky G.I., Komlev O.G., Tormyshev I.V., Petrochenko V.V. Effect of Potential Energy Stored in Reactor Facility Coolant on NPP Safety and Economic Parameters. World Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2013, v. 3, no. 2, pp. 59-64. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4236/wjnst.2013.32010 .
12. Petrochenko V.V., Grigoriev S.A., Komlev O.G., Kondaurov A.V., Toshinsky G.I. SVBR Project: Status and Possible Development. Proc. of the Intern. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development FR17. Paper IAEA-CN245-90. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/49/086/49086080.pdf (accessed Sep. 14, 2011).