+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/02.pdf"
first_page="22"
last_page="34"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Identifying the Key Development Areas for Small Modular Reactors"
original_title="Определение основных направлений развития атомных станций малой мощности"
authors=["SolovievSL", "ZaryuginDG", "KalyakinSG", "LeskinST"]
tags=["Arctic", "small modular reactor", "energy storage devices", "synthetic carbon-free fuel", "new technological platform", "hydrogen", "experimental facility"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.02"

+++

In paper considered Small Modular Reactors (SMR) main advantages of design such as:

– possibility of significant enhance of nuclear power application by introducing in the fields where nuclear technologies are still not used, which is also possible thanks to ability of relocation in close proximity to consumer;

– diminish of cost and construction time due to high degree of industrial production and reducing construction works;

– diminish of cost and construction time due to abandonment of redundant safety systems, integral design application and possibility of decay heat removal directly from the vessel;

– diminish of cost and construction time due to abandonment of site management infrastructure of spent fuel and radioactive waste;

– possibility to meet consumer requirements and grid capacity more flexibly.

– possibility of easing IAEA nonproliferation guaranties demands due to procurement to consumer in «unassembled» form and transport to manufacturer for refueling;

– shorter term for the start of investment return due to phased introduction of energy modules, as well as reduced insurance payments;

– possibility to state-private partnership in construction due to lower investment amount;

– improving the reliability of power supply due to a lower risk of a complete shutdown of a multinodular power plant;

– lower decommissioning costs due to the possibility of taking the modules entirely to the manufacturer for final disposal.

In paper considered possible areas of SMR application, including consumer demands, which are as follows: power supply of remote (Arctic) territories, replacement (renovation) of old coal generation, production of high-potential heat and hydrogen for industrial consumers and other applications.

The necessity of development and implementation of a new technological platform for nuclear energy based on SMRs is shown in order to implement the global decarbonization of the world economy by means of significant expansion of nuclear energy technologies application. This technological platform should be developed in addition to the currently developing one based on the closed nuclear fuel cycle with fast reactors (solving the problem of fuel supply and waste disposal) and also developing technological platform of controlled thermonuclear fusion(solving the problem of global energy supply in the long term). The new technological platform should be created on the bases of broad international cooperation with creation of international consortiums. An experimental testing facility (research reactor)is proposed to be created for the development of captive hydrogen (heat)production technologies for industrial consumers as well as other technologies for the application of small modular reactors.

### References

1. Clark Michael A., Domingo Nina G.G., Colgan Kimberly, Thakrar Sumil K., Tilman David. Global food system emissions could preclude achieving the 1.5° and 2°C climate change targets. Science. 2020, v. 370, iss. 6517, pp. 705-708. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba7357 .
2. Status of Innovative Small and Medium Sized Reactor Designs 2005: Reactors with Conventional Refueling Schemes (IAEA6TECDOC61485). Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 2006, 712 p. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/te_1485_web.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
3. Status of Small Reactor Designs without On6site Refueling (IAEA6TECDOC61536). Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 2007, 870 p. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/te_1536_web.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
4. Small Reactors without On6site Refueling: General Vision, Neutronic Characteristics, Emergency Planning Considerations, and Deployment Scenarios: Final Report of IAEA Coordinated Research Project on Small Reactors without On6site Refueling (IAEA6TECDOC6 1652). Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 2010, 105 p. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/te_1652_web.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
5. Kuznetsov V.P. Opanasyuk Yu.R. Collection of Materials and Research Results on Legal and Institutional Support for Transportable Nuclear Power. Moscow. Kurchatov Institute NRC Publ., 2013, 219 p. ISBN 978-5-904437-74-9 (in Russian).
6. Kuznetsov V.P. Task «Legal and Institutional Support of Nuclear Energy on the Basis of Transportable Nuclear Power Plants»: INPRO International Project. Moscow. Kurchatov Institute NRC Publ., 2009, 24 p. (in Russian).
7. Small Modular Reactors: Nuclear Energy Market Potential for Near6term Deployment. Paris. OECD-NEA Publ., 2016, 75 р. Available at: https://oecd-nea.org/upload/docs/application/pdf/2019-12/7213-smrs.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
8. Small Modular Reactors: Challenges and Opportunities. Paris. OECD-NEA Publ., 2021, 56 р. Available at: https://oecd-nea.org/upload/docs/application/pdf/2021-03/7560_smr_report.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
9. Tarasenkov A.B., Shkolnikov E.I. Hydrogen Cycle and Other Methods of Buffer Accumulation of Electricity for Solar-Powered Power Plants: Comparative Technical and Economic Analysis. Proc. of the II International Conference «Hydrogen Storage Technologies», Moscow, Oct. 28629, 2009. Moscow. Nauchtehlitizdat Publ., 2009, pp. 43-44 (in Russian).
10. Kliment’ev A.Yu., Kliment’eva A.A. Ammonia is a Promising Motor Fuel for a Carbon-Free Economy. Transport na Alternativnom Toplive. 2017, no. 3 (57), pp. 17-25 (in Russian).
11. Zajchenko V.M., Tsoj A.D., Shterenberg V.Ya. Distributed Energy Production. Moscow. BuKos Publ. 2008, 207 p. (in Russian).
12. Majkov I.L., Director L.B. Solving Problems of Optimization and Management of Hybrid Energy Complexes in the Structure of Distributed Generation. The Management of Large Systems. Collection of Works IPU RAN. Issue 35. Moscow. IPU RAN Publ., 2011, pp. 250-264, ISSN 1819-2440 (in Russian).
13. Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2020. Paris. OECD-NEA Publ. 2020, 223 р. Available at: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/ae17da3d-e8a5-4163-a3ec-2e6fb0b5677d/Projected-Costs-of-Generating-Electricity-2020.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
14. Amelina M.E., Kutumov A.M. Civil Liability Issues in the Construction and Operation of Low Power Nuclear Plants. In the Collection «Low6power Nuclear Plants: a New Direction in the Development of Russian Energy». Edited by A.A. Sarkisov. Volume 2. Moscow. IBRAE RAN Publ., 2011, pp. 315-322 (in Russian).
15. Ball M., Wietschel M. The Hydrogen Economy. Opportunities and Challenges. Cambridge University Publ., 2009, 672 p. ISBN-13 978-0-521-88216-3.
16. Zhuravlyov I.B., Zaluzhnyj A.A. Ptitsyn P.B. Technical and Economic Research (TER) on the Topic of the Priority Direction of Scientific and Technical Development «Hydrogen Energy». Moscow. CAIR, Science and Innovation Private Institution Publ., 2021, 150 p. ISBN 978-5-498-00807-3 (in Russian).
17. Rouillard J., Rouyer J. Technical and Economic Evaluation of Potable Water Production through Desalination of Sea Water by Using Nuclear Energy and Other Means (IAEA6TECDOC6666). Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 1992, 148 p. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/24/007/24007848.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
18. Collection of Works of the Laureates of the International Competition of Scientific, Scientific6Technical and Innovative Developments Aimed at the Development and Development of the Arctic and the Continental Shelf. Moscow. Energy Ministry of the Russian Federation, Technologies of Development LLC Publ., 2015, 136 p. Available at: https://in.minenergo.gov.ru/upload/tek/analitika/Arctica-2015-web.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021) (in Russian).
19. Levchenko V.A., Belugin V.A., Kazanskiy Yu.A., Matusevich E.S., Ronen I., Yur’ev Yu.S., Balakin I.P., Dorohovich S.L., Kurachenko Yu.A., Levchenko A.V., Uvarov A.A. The Main Characteristics of the Americium Reactor for Neutron Therapy. Reactor «Mars». Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2003, no. 3, pp. 72-82. Available at: https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/journals/2003/03.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021) (in Russian).
20. Advances in Small Modular Reactor Technology Developments. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 2018. Available at: https://aris.iaea.org/Publications/SMR_Book_2018.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
21. Advances in Small Modular Reactor Technology Developments. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 2020. Available at: https://aris.iaea.org/Publications/SMR_Book_2020.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).
22. Reinforcing the Global Nuclear Order for Peace and Prosperity: The Role of the IAEA to 2020 and Beyond. Report Prepared by an Independent Commission at the Request of the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency Publ., 2008, 42 p. Available at: https://ycsg.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/IAEA_2020_report.pdf (accessed Nov. 30, 2021).