+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/03.pdf"
first_page="35"
last_page="44"
udc="621.039.534.4"
title="Possibility for Using a Low-Enriched Target to Produce 99Mo in the MAK-2 Research Channel of the VVR-ts Reactor"
original_title="Возможность применения низкообогащенной мишени для получения 99Мо в исследовательском канале МАК-2 реактора ВВР-ц"
authors=["ZevyakinAS", "KolesovVV", "SobolevAV", "KochnovOY"]
tags=["VVR-ts reactor", "MAK-2 research channel", "99Mo production", "power density", "thermohydraulic calculation", "enrichment reduction"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.03"

+++

Thermal-hydraulic calculations have been conducted with respect to the active part of the MAK-2 loop facility of the VVR-ts research reactor for the 99Mo production. The computational studies were undertaken both for the case of using a highly 235U enriched target and for a low-enriched target. The calculation was performed for the actual technical characteristics of the research channel. The power density for the two-simulated cases was obtained in the course of a preliminary neutronic calculation and selected for the most heated channel.

The problem is solved for the steady-state mode of the channel coolant flow and takes into account the dependence of the thermophysical parameters of materials on temperature. The volumetric temperature distribution in the channel was obtained in the process of the calculation.

The calculation results present the maximum temperatures of the target materials for the 99Mo production. An analysis of the obtained results has shown that the maximum temperatures of the aluminum sleeve and the target filling materials do not exceed the critical values. For the analyzed calculation cases, the maximum coolant temperature is localized at a point near the sleeve wall surface and does not reach the boiling temperature for a given pressure. The study has therefore shown that it is possible to reduce the 235U enrichment of the target filling fissile material to 19.7%, provided the average density of the mixture and the amount of 235U in the target remain the same. At the same time, the amount of the medicinally important 99Mo generated will not practically change, which will lead to reduced capital costs for a highly enriched mixture of the target matrix.

### References

1. Livejournal. How Technetium-99 is made. Available at: https://alexio-marziano.livejournal.com/159160.html (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
2. Molybdenum-99. Russian Nuclear Community. Available at: www.atomic-energy.ru (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
3. Management of Radioactive Waste from 99Mо Production IAEA. IAEA-TECDOC. Vienna, 1998, 1051 p.
4. Review of Potential Molybdenum-99/Techetium-99m Production Technologies. Nuclear Energy Agency. OECD, 2010, 74 p.
5. Zykov M.P., Kodina G.E. Methods for Obtaining Mo-99. Radiokhimiya. 1999, no. 3, v. 41, pp. 193-203. (in Russian).
6. Kolobashkin V.M. et al. Radiation Characteristics of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel: Reference Book. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 384 p. (in Russian).
7. Website of L.Ya. Karpov NIFHI JSC. Available at: http://karpovipc.ru/ (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
8. Website «Scientific and Technical Infrastructure of the Russian Federation». Available at: http://ckp-rf.ru/usu/77709/ (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
9. Chusov I.A., Shelegov A.S., Kochnov O.Yu. Features of the Design of Research Reactors of Pressurized Water Type. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 3, pp. 116-126; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe 2016.3.12 (in Russian).
10. Website of All-Regional Association «Izotop» JSC. Available at: http://www.isotop.ru/ (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
11. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Zevyakin A.S., Fomin R.V. Thermal-Hydraulic Calculation of the Maximum Temperature of Fuel and Water in the MAK-2 Installation. Atomnaya Energiya. 2019, iss. 3, pp. 135-137; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00601-x (in Russian).
12. Boyko V.I., Kolpakov G.N., Selivannikova O.V. Fuel Materials in Nuclear Power Engineering. Tutorial. Tomsk. Tomsk Polytechnic University Publ., 2008, 186 p. ISBN 5-98298-264-4 (in Russian).
13. Pakholik D.A., Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomichev V.V. Increasing the Production of the Mo-99 Isotope by Modernizing the Design of Targets Irradiated in the Experimental Channels of the VVR-ts Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2021, no. 3, pp. 18-28; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.02 (in Russian).
14. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V. Evaluation of Energy Release in a Target with Uranium-Containing Material in the Production of 99Mo using Targets of an Improved Design at the VVR-ts Reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 4, pp. 23-29 (in Russian).
15. Alikulov Sh.A., Akhmedzhanov F.R., Baitelesov S.A., Boltabaev A.F., Kungurov F.R., Rakhimov E.T., Salikhbaev U.S. Electrical and Thermal Conductivity of Aluminum Alloys SAV-1 and AMG-2 at High Temperature. Atomnaya Energiya. 2014, iss. 5, pp. 270-273 (in Russian).
16. Chirkin V.S. Thermophysical Properties of Nuclear Engineering Materials. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1967, 474 p. (in Russian).
17. Kirillov P.L., Bogoslovskaya G.P. Heat Transfer in Nuclear Power Plants: Textbook for Universities. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2000, 456 p. (in Russian).
18. Metallurgy of Uranium and Technology of its Compounds. Course of lectures of the Ural Federal University n.a. the first President of Russia B.N. Yeltsin. Available at: http://elar.urfu.ru/bitstream/10995/28700/1/978-5-7996-1282-5_2014.pdf (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
19. Termalinfo. Properties of Metal Oxides. Available at: http://thermalinfo.ru/svojstva-materialov/oksidy/svojstva-oksidov-metallov (accessed Feb. 10, 2021) (in Russian).
20. Akhmedzyanov D.A., Kishalov A.E. Verification of the Calculation of the Heat Transfer Process in the ANSYS CFX Software Package. Vestnik Ufimskogo Gosudarstvennogo Aviatsionnogo Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta. 2009, no. 2, pp.226-232 (in Russian).
21. Sobolev A.V., Zevyakin A.S., Fomin R.V., Kolesov V.V., Kochnov O.Yu. Modernization of Targets for Molybdenum Production. Proc. of the Conference «Innovations in Nuclear Energy». Moscow. NIKIET JSC, 2017, pp. 1023-1033 (in Russian).
22. Vargaftik N.B. Handbook on Thermophysical Properties of Gases and Liquids. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1972, 721 p. (in Russian).