+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/05.pdf"
first_page="54"
last_page="65"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Real-Time Temperature Field Recovery of a Heterogeneous Reactor Based on the Results of Calculations in a Homogeneous Core"
original_title="Восстановление в реальном времени температурного поля гетерогенного реактора по результатам расчета температуры в гомогенной активной зоне"
authors=["KuzevanovVS", "PodgornySK"]
tags=["temperature field", "reactor core", "thermal conductivity equation", "heat sink function", "fuel element", "real time"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.05"

+++

Advanced pressurized water reactors are the main part of a new generation of nuclear power plant projects under development that provide cost-effective power production for various needs [1 – 6]. The innovative technologies are aimed at improving the safety and reliability as well as at reducing the cost of NPPs. At the same time, improvements in design, technological and layout solutions are focused primarily on the reactor core.

Assessments of the efficiency of these improvements are preceded by numerical simulations of the processes in the core, in particular heat generation and sink, with account for the difference between the study object and the standard version tested in operational practice.

The authors of the article propose a method for calculating the temperature field in the core of a heterogeneous reactor (using the example of a pressurized water reactor), which makes it possible to quickly assess the level of temperature safety of various changes in the core and has the necessary speed for analyzing transients in real time.

This method is based on the energy equation for an equivalent homogeneous core in the form of a heat equation that takes into account the main features of the simulated heterogeneous structure.

The procedure for recovering the temperature field of a heterogeneous reactor uses the analytical relation obtained in this work for the heat sink function, taking into account inter-fuel element heat leakage losses. Calculations of temperature fields in the model of the PWR type reactor [7] were carried out in stationary and transient operating modes. The calculation results were compared with the results of CFD simulation. Mutual coincidence of the temperature fields in fuel elements in the transient process was obtained. The area of competing use of the temperature field recovery method was indicated.

### References

1. Bojko V.I., Demyanyuk D.S., Koshelev F.P., Meshheryakov V.N., Shamanin I.V., Shidlovskij V.V. Advanced Nuclear Fuel Cycles and New Generation Reactors. Tomsk. TPU Publ., 2005, pp. 5-60 (in Russian).
2. Emel’yanov I.Ya., Mihan V.I., Solonin V.I., Demeshhev R.S., Rekshnya N.F. Nuclear Reactor Design. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1982, pp. 56-76 (in Russian).
3. Baklushin R.P. NPP Operation. Part 1. NPP Operation in Power Systems. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2011, pp. 121-134 (in Russian).
4. Nuclear Technology Review 2019. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency, 2019, pp. 1-3 (in Russian).
5. Bays S., Abou Jaoude A., Borlodan G. Reactor Fundamentals Handbook. Idaho Falls. Idaho National Laboratory, 2019. pp. 22-31; DOI: https://doi.org/10.2172/1615634 .
6. Klimov A.N. Nuclear Physics and Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2002. pp. 429-435 (in Russian).
7. The Westinghouse Pressurized Water Reactor Nuclear Plant. Pittsburgh. Westinghouse Electric Corporation, 1984, pp. 15-18.
8. Kuzevanov V.S., Zakozhurnikov S.S., Zakozhurnikova G.S., Garyaev A.B. The Process Model and the Calculation of the Temperature Field in the Resistance Furnace for the Production of the Silicone Carbide. Vestnik IGUE. 2017, no. 420, pp. 21-29; DOI: https://doi.org/10.17588/2072-2672.2017.4.021-029 (in Russian).
9. Kuzevanov V.S., Podgorny S.K. Temperature Field in the Active Zone of a Gas-Cooled Reactor in Transient Conditions under Different Mass Flow Profiling Conditions. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 3, p. 55; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.05 (in Russian).
10. Kuzevanov V.S., Podgorny S.K. Gas-Cooled Reactors. Profiling and Intensification of Heat Transfer. Kishinev. Palmarium Academic Publ., 2019, 84 p. (in Russian).
11. Petuhov B.S., Kirillov V.V. On the Issue of Heat Transfer in Turbulent Flow of Fluid in Pipes. Teploehnergetika. 1958, no. 4, pp. 29-31 (in Russian).
12. Kuzevanov V.S., Podgorny S.K. Shaping of a Gas-Cooled Reactor Core using Heat Exchange Intensifiers. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 4, pp. 31-42; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.4.03 (in Russian).
13. ANSYS Fluent. User’s Guide. Canonsburg. ANSYS Inc, 2016, pp. 238-247.
14. ANSYS Fluent. Customization Manual. Canonsburg. ANSYS Inc, 2016, pp. 91-100.
15. ANSYS Fluent. Theory Guide. Canonsburg. ANSYS Inc, 2016, pp. 137-177.
16. Shaw C.T. Using Computational Fluid Dynamics. New Jersey. Prentice Hall, 1992, pp. 100-137.
17. Anderson J., Dick E., Dergez G., Grundmann R., Degroote J., Vierendeels J. Computational Fluid Dynamics: An introduction. Berlin. Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 10-17.
18. Petrila T., Trif D. Basics of Fluid Mechanics and Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics. Boston. Springer, 2005, pp. 197-239.
19. Mohammadi B., Pironneau O. Analysis of the K-Epsilon Turbulence Model. New Jersey.Wiley, 1994, pp. 51-62.
20. Podgorny S.K., Kuzevanov V.S. Temperature Field in Pressurized Water Reactor with Uncased Fuel Assemblies. Proc. of the XI International Scientific Conference «The Latest Research in Modern Science: Experience, Traditions and Innovations». Morrisville, North Carolina, USA, 7-8 July, 2020, pp. 20-31.