+++

categories="article"
date="2022-01-20T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/07.pdf"
first_page="79"
last_page="89"
udc="621.039.564"
title="Experimental Study of a Microwave Reflex-Radar Level Gauge of a Liquid-Metal Coolant"
original_title="Экспериментальное исследование микроволнового рефлекс-радарного уровнемера жидкометаллического теплоносителя"
authors=["MelnikovVI", "BokovaTA", "IvanovVV", "MarovAP", "LobaevaNA", "KvashennikovAS", "BokovPA", "VolkovNS"]
tags=["fast reactor", "liquid metal coolant", "coolant level", "level measurement", "level measurement methods"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.07"

+++

The article presents the results of work aimed at solving the problem of measuring the coolant level in the tanks of reactor plants for various purposes with a liquid metal coolant. The authors made a comprehensive review of known methods for measuring the level of various liquids and bulk solids in various industries. Based on this review, they propose and describe a method of pulsed microwave reflectometry as the most promising in terms of combining the characteristics of reliability, accuracy and ease of use. The results of the experimental study demonstrated the efficiency of the level gauge, which worked according to this method, for measuring the level of lead-bismuth coolant in the control tank under conditions close to natural ones. An analysis of the results confirmed the possibility of using this method to control the level of melts of various metals as applied to reactor plants with HLMT. Using the device for measuring the level, which works according to the proposed method, it is possible to control the level of melt of various metals in tanks in real time without the need to move various parts of the sensitive element of the level gauge while maintaining the tightness of the circuit. This device is applicable for various nuclear power plants, accelerator-controlled systems, research reactors and experimental facilities with liquid metal coolants.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Bolshov L.A., Ganev I.Kh., Zrodnikov A.V., Kuznetsov A.K., Lopatkin A.V., Mastepanov A.M., Orlov V.V., Rachkov V.I., Smirnov V.S., Solonin M.I., Uzhanova V.V., Chernoplekov N.A., Shatalov G.E. White Book of Nuclear Power. Moscow. GUP NIKIET Publ., 2001. 269 p. ISBN 5-86324-035-0. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/belaya-kniga-yadernoy-energetiki_2001/go,0/ (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
2. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A. Equipment, Layout and Operation Modes of Circuits with Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Power. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2011, 536 p. (in Russian).
3. Dzhangobekov V.V., Stepanov V.S., Dedul A.V., Klimov N.N., Bolvanchikov S.N., Vakhrushin M.P. Reactor Unit SVBR-100 for Modular Atomic Stations of Low and Medium Power. Proc. of the IV Conference «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies» (HLMC(2013)», Sep. 23(26 2013. Obninsk. IPPE JSC Publ., 2013. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/publication/publication2013/documents/245.pdf (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
4. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Bokov P.A., Marov A.R., Lvov A.V., Volkov N.S. Substantiation of Technical Solutions of the Reactor Circuit of the BRS-GPG Units of Small and Medium Power with a Heavy Liquid Metal Coolant for Ground and Floating NNPs. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2020, no. 2 (129), pp. 64-76; DOI: https://doi.org/10.46960/1816-210X_2020_2_64 (in Russian).
5. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Bokov P.A., Marov A.R., Lvov A.V., Volkov N.S. Substantiation of Technical Solutions of the Reactor Circuit of the BRS-GPG Units of Small and Medium Power. VANT. Ser. Yaderno(Reaktornye Konstanty. 2020, no. 1, pp. 132-139; DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2020-1-132-139 (in Russian).
6. Chirkin V.S. Thermophysical Properties of Materials in Nuclear Power. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968, 484 p. (in Russian).
7. Chechetkin A.V. High Temperature Heat Transfer Fluids. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1971, 496 p. (in Russian).
8. Beznosov A.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Rachkov V.I. Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Energy. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2007, 432 p. Available at: https://search.rsl.ru/ru/record/01003085239 (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
9. Methods for Measuring and Controlling the Level. Types of Level Gauges. Comparison and Overview of Level Gauges. Available at: https://eti.su/articles/izmeritelnaya-tehnika/izmeritelnaya-tehnika_1521.html (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
10. Leshkov V.V., Taranin V.D. Inductive Level Gauge. Patent for Invention of the Russian Federation 2328704. No. 2006141311/28. Appl. 23.11.2006. Publ. 07.10.2008 (in Russian).
11. Taranin V.D. Inductive Level Gauge for Liquid Metal Coolant. Patent for Invention of the Russian Federation 2558010. No. 2013146131/28. Appl. 10/15/2013. Publ. 07/27/2015 (in Russian).
12. Trakhtenberg L.I., Deniskin V.P. Device for Non(Contact Measurement of the Level and Resistivity of Molten Metals. Patent for invention of the USSR 197214. No. 1018402 / 26-10. Appl. 07/12/1965. Publ. 05/31/1967 (in Russian).
13. Kirillov P.L., Kolesnikov V.D., Kuznetsov V.A., Turchin N.M. Instruments for Measuring Pressure, Flow and Level for Fused Alkali Metals. Atomnaya Energiya. 1960, v. 9, iss. 3, pp. 173-181; Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t9-3_1960/go,4/ (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
14. Vorontsov A.C., Frolov P.A. Pulse Measurements of Coaxial Communication Cables. Moscow. Radio i Svyaz’ Publ., 1985, 96 p. (in Russian).
15. Tarasov N.A. Using the Method of Impulse Reflectometry to Determine the Damage of Cable Lines. Available at: http://reis.narod.ru/metod.htm (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
16. Needle D., Shepard S.F. Apparatus and Methods for Time Domain Reflectometry. Patent of the USA 5726578A Publ. 03/10/1998.
17. Instructions for Installation and Operation of the KROHNE BM100 Level Gauge. Available at: www.ste.ru/krohne/pdf/rus/russ_op_manualBM100.pdf (accessed Sep. 27, 2021) (in Russian).
18. Melnikov V.I., Ivanov V.V., Teplyashin I.A., Timonin M.A. Development and Research of a Microwave Reflex-Radar Liquid Level Gauge. Datchiki i Sistemy. 2017, no. 3, pp. 50-54 (in Russian).
19. Melnikov V.I., Ivanov V.V., Teplyashin I.A., Timonin M.A. Development and Study of a Microwave Reflex-Radar Level Gauge of the Nuclear Reactor Coolant. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018. no. 2, pр. 185-190; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.02 (in Russian).
20. Trenkal E.I., Loshchilov A.G. Measurement of Liquid Levels by the Method of Pulse Reflectometry (Review). Doklady TUSUR. 2016, v. 19, no. 4; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21293/1818-0442-2016-19-4-67-73 (in Russian).