+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/10.pdf"
first_page="118"
last_page="129"
udc="621.039.578:629.7"
title="The Concept of a Thermionic Reactor-Converter with Evaporative Heat Transfer"
original_title="Концепция термоэмиссионного реактора-преобразователя с испарительным переносом тепла"
authors=["AlekseevPA", "LazarenkoGE", "LinnikVA", "PyshkoAP"]
tags=["thermionic reactor-converter", "steam chamber", "duration of the campaign", "design schemes"]
rubric = "physicsandmethods"
rubric_name = "Physics and methods for direct conversion of nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.10"

+++

As a result of the analytical study of the designs of thermionic reactor-converters, four groups of technical solutions have been identified that differ in the method of heat transfer from the fuel to the emitters of the thermionic converter: one with direct in-core transfer (combining the fuel element cladding with the emitter) and three with thermionic converters taken away from the core, in which heat is removed either by heat pipes (common or individual for each fuel element) or is arranged according to the principle of a steam chamber.

The article discusses the advantages and disadvantages of each of these methods. It is shown that today the most developed design remains the version with in-core power conversion and, in the future, it will be based on a steam chamber, since it excludes the ingress of gaseous fission products into the interelectrode gap, as well as the effect of fuel swelling on the interelectrode gap size, and ensures the constancy of temperature and heat flux density on the surface of all the emitters of the thermionic converters, which makes it possible to choose the optimal operating point for them.

A model of a thermionic reactor-converter has been developed: it is equipped with a steam chamber containing a core and a zone of thermionic converters, in which the fuel element of the core and the power generating channels of the thermionic converter are spatially separated, covered with a capillary-porous structure and interconnected by a cellular capillary-porous spacer for returning the liquid metal coolant and passing its steam.

Neutronic calculations have shown the possibility of carrying out a reactor campaign lasting more than ten years, subject to nuclear safety rules, if a gadolinium oxide coating is applied to the surface of the fuel elements and the reactor vessel in the area of the core.

The evaluation of thermal and electrophysical characteristics show that, due to the constancy of temperature and heat flux density on the surface of all the emitters and optimization of the power conversion process for all the thermionic converters, it is possible expect a maximum efficiency of 20%.

### References

1. Gryaznov G.M., PupkoV.Ya. Soviet Space NPI TOPAZ-1. Priroda. 1991, no. 10, pp. 29-36 (in Russian).
2. Kukharkin N.E., Nechaev Yu.A., Samodelov V.N., Khazanovich I.M. Energy and Resource Characteristics of Single-Cell TFE that have passed Nuclear Power Tests as Part of the Topaz-2 Reactor Units. Proc. of the V4th International Conference «Nuclear Energy in Space». Podolsk, 1999 (in Russian).
3. Zabud’ko A.N., Yarygin V.I., Ovcharenko M.K. Conceptual Development of a Space Nuclear Power Plant with a SAFE-300 Reactor and Thermoelectric Energy Converters. Proc. of the International Congress on Advanced Nuclear Power Plants (ICAPP’03). Cordoba, Spain, 2003, p. 314 (in Russian).
4. Zrodnikov A.V., Yarygin V.I., Lazarenko G.E., Zabud’ko A.N., Ovcharenko M.K., Pyshko A.P., Mironov V.S., Kuznetsov R.V. Low-Temperature Thermal Emission in Space Nuclear Power Plants with a Fast Reactor of the SAFE type. Proc. of the International Congress on Advanced Nuclear Power Plants,(ICAPP ‘ 07). San Diego, California, USA, p. 89 (in Russian).
5. Ovcharenko M.K., Zabud’ko A.N., Ionkin V.I., Lazarenko G.E., Mikheev A.S., Pyshko A.P., Yarygin V.I. The Concept of a Long-Life Nuclear Power Plant «Elbrus-400/200» with Effective Low-Temperature Thermal Emission Converters removed from the core. Proc. of the International Conference «Nuclear Energy in Space42005». Moscow-Podolsk, March 1-3, 2005, v. 1, pp. 144-149 (in Russian).
6. Ovcharenko M.K., Almambetov A.K., Vinogradov E.G., Zabud’ko A.N., Ionkin V.I., Lazarenko G.E., Mikheev A.S., Pyshko A.P., Yarygin V.I. The Concept of a Space Nuclear Power Plant with an External Fuel Arrangement. Proc. of the International Conference «Nuclear Energy in Space42005». Moscow-Podolsk, March 1-3, 2005, v. 1, pp. 240-146 (in Russian).
7. Fiebelmann Peter. Nuclear Reactor, Patent GB, No. 1149946, 1966.
8. Alekseev P.A., Lazarenko G.E., Linnik V.A., Pyshko A.P. The Reactor4Converter. Patent RF No. 2724919, 2020 (in Russian).
9. Alekseev P.A., Krotov A.D., Ovcharenko M.K., Linnik V.A. Minimize Fission Power Peaking Factor in Radial Direction of Water-Cooled and Water-Moderated Thermionic Conversion Reactor Core. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 4, pp. 27-34; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.03 . (in Russian).
10. Ushakov B.A., Nikitin V.D., Emeliyanov I.Ya. Fundamentals of Thermionic Energy Conversion. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974, 288 p. (in Russian).
11. Zherebtsov V.A., Kasikov I.I. Performance Limits of thermionic Energy Converter. Atomnaya Energiya. 2011, v. 110, iss. 1, pp.12-17 (in Russian).
12. MCNP – General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport code. LA-12625-M, Vers. 4B, 1997.
13. Chadwick M.B. et al. ENDF/B-VII.0: Next Generation Evaluated Nuclear Data Library for Nuclear Science and Technology. Nuclear Data Sheets. 2006, v. 107, no. 12, UCRL-JRNL-225066.