+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/11.pdf"
first_page="130"
last_page="139"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Neutron Background of Composite Low-Enriched Uranium Fuel of the IVG.1M Research Reactor"
original_title="Нейтронный фон композитного низкообогащенного уранового топлива исследовательского реактора ИВГ.1М"
authors=["IrkimbekovRA", "VurimAD", "BedenkoSV", "SurayevAS", "VityukGA"]
tags=["TheIVG.1M research reactor", "low-enriched uranium nuclear fuel", "dosimetry", "(α, n)-reaction"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.11"

+++

In 2010, within the framework of the Kazakhstan-USA cooperation under the auspices of the IAEA, the IVG.1M reactor was included in the program for converting research reactors cores to low-enriched uranium fuel.

After the conversion to low-enriched uranium is completed, the IVG.1M reactor operation will continue, while the duration of its operation will be determined by the availability of fresh fuel to replace the core after the next campaign and the ability to ensure safe storage of SNF removed from the core. Safe storage conditions are assessed in terms of nuclear and radiation safety.

Radiation safety of storage of SNF from research reactors is primarily achieved by solving the problems of protection against γ-radiation, and neutron radiation is generally not considered due to its significantly lower intensity in comparison with γ -radiation. Concerning the new low-enriched uranium fuel of the IVG.1M reactor, which is characterized by a set of elements with low and medium atomic mass, where the (α, n) reaction is possible, the assessment of the neutron component is a necessary procedure to ensure the safe fuel storage.

The goal of this research is to estimate the neutron radiation level of fresh and irradiated fuel of the IVG.1M reactor and to develop recommendations for safe long-term SNF storage.

To achieve this goal, the authors of the article created a full-scale computational 3D model of the reactor, carried out neutron characterization of the reactor core and studies of the evolutionary fuel composition, and calculated the neutron radiation levels of fresh and irradiated fuel.

The research was carried out using verified computational codes MCNP5 and Sources-4C, high-precision experimental EXFOR and computational ENDSF data, as well as evaluated nuclear data libraries.

### References

1. Irkimbekov R.A., Zhagiparova L.K., Kotov V.M., Vurim A.D., Gnyrya V.S. Neutronics Model of the IVG.1M Reactor: Development and Critical-State Verification. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 127, pp. 69-76.
2. Batyrbekov E.G., Skakov M.K., Vurim A.D., Kolodeshnikov A.A., Baklanov V.V., Gnyrya V.S., Irkimbekov R.A., Zuev V.A., Ganovichev A.A., Koyanbaev E.T., Sapataev E.E. Conversion of the Research Reactor IVG.1M.Vestnik NYATS RK. 2015, no. 2, pp. 6-18 (in Kazakh).
3. Zhanbolatov O.M., Vurim A.D., Surayev A. S., Irkimbekov R. A. Development of Scenarios for Controlling the Fuel Campaign of the IVG.1M Reactor with Leu-Fuel. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2022, v. 2155, art. 012017; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/2155/1/012017 .
4. Wilson W.B., Perry R.T., Charlton W.S., Parish T.A. Sources: A Code for Calculating (alpha, n), Spontaneous Fission, and Delayed Neutron Sources and Spectra. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2009, v. 51 (4-5), pp. 608-613.
5. Bulanenko V.I. Neutron Yield of (α, n) Reaction on Oxygen. Soviet Atomic Energy. 1979, v. 47, pp. 531-534.
6. Murata T., Shibata K. Evaluation of the (α, n) Reaction Nuclear Data for Light Nuclei. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2002, v. 39, pp. 76-79.
7. Vlaskin G.N., Khomyakov Yu.S., Bulanenko V.I. Neutron Yield of the Reaction (α, n) on Thick Targets Comprised of Light Elements. Atomic Energy. 2015, v. 117 (5), pp. 357-365.
8. Dulin V.V., Zabrodskaya S.A. About Contribution of (α, n) Reaction to Intensity of Neutron Radiation of Dioxide of Plutonium. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2005, no. 4, pp. 18-24 (in Russian).
9. Vlaskin G.N., Khomyakov Yu.S. Neutron Spectra of (α, n) Reactions on Thick Targets of Light Elements. Atomnaya Energiya. 2021, v. 130 (2), pp. 98-110 (in Russian).
10. Pigni M; Croft S; Gauld I. Uncertainty Quantification in (α, n) Neutron Source Calculations for an Oxide Matrix. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2016, v. 91, pp. 147-152.
11. Simakov S., Berg Q. Update of the α-n Yields for Reactor Fuel Materials for the Interest of Nuclear Safeguards. Nuclear Data Sheets. 2017, v. 139, pp. 190-203.
12. Evaluated Nuclear Data Library Descriptions, Nuclear Energy Agency. Available at: https://oecd-nea.org/dbdata/data/nds_eval_libs.htm (accessed Sep. 28, 2021).
13. Bedenko S.V., Knyshev V.V., KuznetsovaM.E., Shamanin I.V.Peculiarities of residual radiation formation of disperse micro encapsulated nuclear fuel. Izvestia Vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 3, pp. 75-87; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.07 (in Russian).
14. Bedenko S.V., Lutsik I.O., Knyshev V.V., Gubaydulin I.M., Shamanin I.V. Radiation Characteristics of Fuel with a Complex Internal Structure. Voprosy Radiatsionnoy Bezopasnosti. 2019, no. 2, pp. 51-57 (in Russian).
15. Ghal-Eh N., Rahmani F., Bedenko S.V. Conceptual Design for a New Heterogeneous 241Am-9 Be Neutron Source Assembly using Sources4C-MCNPX Hybrid Simulations. Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 2019, v. 153, art. 108811; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apradiso.2019.108811 .
16. Bedenko S.V., Ghal-Eh N., Lutsik I.O., Shamanin I.V. A Fuel for Generation IV Nuclear Energy System: Isotopic Composition and Radiation Characteristics. Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 2019, v. 147, pp. 189-196.
17. Dulin V.V., Matveyenko I.P. Alpha-Rossi Determination of deeply subcritical states of multiplying media. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2002, no. 1, pp. 9-18 (in Russian).
18. Grabezhnoy V.A., Dulin V.A., Dulin V.V., Mikhaylov G.M. On the Determination of Neutron Multiplication by the Rossi-alpha Method. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2021, no. 2, pp. 50-58; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.05 (in Russian).