+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/12.pdf"
first_page="140"
last_page="150"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Proliferation Protection of Uranium Due to the Presence of 232U Decay Products as Intense Sources of Hard Gamma Radiation"
original_title="Причины жесткого гамма-излучения в цепочке распада 232U, защищающей уран от неконтролируемого использования"
authors=["KulikovGG", "ShmelevAN", "ApseVA", "KulikovEG"]
tags=["hard γ-radiation", "chain of nuclide transformations of uranium-232", "proliferation protection of uranium"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.12"

+++

The purpose of the article is to show the nuclear-physical causes of hard γ-quanta in the uranium-232 decay chain, to propose tactics for handling uranium containing uranium-232, and to assess the magnitude of its protective γ-barrier against uncontrolled use of uranium.

The authors show the general picture of the decays of the chain of nuclide transformations of uranium-232, on which the protection of uranium from its uncontrolled use is based. During the decay of nuclei, their emission of α- or β-particles is only the first stage of the most complex process of rearrangement of both the internal structure of the nucleus itself, which consists in the rearrangement of the neutron and proton shells and the levels of its excitation, and in the rearrangement of the electron shells of the atom. As a rule, the daughter nucleus is in a highly excited state, which is removed by the emission of hard γ-quanta and internal conversion electrons. After the second case, the remaining excitation of the atom is removed by the emission of characteristic γ-quanta and Auger-electrons with characteristic γ -quanta.

In addition, explanations are given for the quantum-mechanical reasons for the hard γ-radiation of thallium-208 and bismuth-212, which complete the decay chain of uranium-232.

The authors also proposed a tactic for handling uranium containing uranium-232. Since the hard γ-quanta of thallium-208 and bismuth-212 appear only at the end of the decay chain of uranium-232, after its chemical purification from its decay products, uranium-232 itself does not pose a radiation hazard; therefore, at this time it is advisable to conduct all necessary operations for transporting the material to the plant, fabricating uranium-based fuel containing uranium-232, and transporting this fuel to the nuclear facility where it will be used.

### References

1. National Nuclear Data Center of Brookhaven National Laboratory of USA. Available at: https://www.nndc.bnl.gov/nudat3/ (accessed Oct. 12, 2021).
2. Varlamov V.V., Ishhanov B.S., Komarov S.Yu. Atomic Nuclei. Main Characteristics: Training Manual. Moscow. Universitetskaya Kniga Publ., 2010, 334 p. ISBN 978-5-91304-145-6 (in Russian).
3. Kang J., Von Hippel F.N. U-232 and Proliferation Resistance of U-233 in Spent Fuel. Science and Global Security. 2001, v. 9, pp. 1-32; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08929880108426485 .
4. De Volpi A. Denaturing Fissile Materials. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 1982, v. 10, pp. 161-220; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0149-1970(82)90022-1 .
5. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. Physical Aspects for Involvement of Thermonuclear Reactors into Nuclear Power Systems. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2020, v. 1689, art. 012033; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1689/1/012033 .
6. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Kruglikov A.E., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. Possibility Assessment for Production of Non-Traditional Nuclear Fuel in Thorium Blanket of Hybrid Thermonuclear Reactor. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2020, v. 1689, art. 012034; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1689/1/012034 .
7. Andrianov A.A., Kuptsov I.S., Osipova T.A., Andrianova O.N., Utyanskaya T.V. Optimization Models of a Two-Component Nuclear Energy System with Thermal and Fast Reactors in a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Izvestiya Vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 3, pp. 100-112. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.09 (in Russian).
8. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Geraskin N.I., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A. Advanced Nuclear Fuel Cycle for the RF Using Actinides Breeding in Thorium Blankets of Fusion Neutron Source. Nuclear Energy and Technology. 2016, v. 2, pp. 147-150; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucet.2016.05.014 .
9. Orlov V.V., Shatalov G.E., Marin S.V. Evolution of Fuel Isotope Composition in Blanket of Hybrid Thermonuclear Reactor. Report of Kurchatov Institute on Nuclear Energy. 1979, pp. 29-30 (in Russian).
10. Shief H.E.J. et al Measurements of the Reaction Rate Distributions Produced in a Large Thorium Cylinder by a Central Source of DT Neutrons. United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, 1977.
11. Krumbein A., Lemanska M., Segev M., Wagschal J.J., Yaari A. Reaction Rate Calculations in Uranium and Thorium Blankets Surrounding a Central Deuterium-Tritium Neutron Source. Nuclear Technology. 1980, v. 48, pp. 110-116; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/nt80-a32457.