+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-20T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2022-01"
issue_name="2022 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/01/14.pdf"
first_page="161"
last_page="168"
udc="621.039"
title="TES-3 –Transportable Nuclear Power Plant Installed on Self-Propelled Tracked Transporters"
original_title="ТЭС-3 – передвижная атомная электростанция, транспортируемая на гусеничных самоходах"
authors=["NaumenkoNYu", "MokhirevaIM"]
tags=["TPP-3", "nuclear power train", "the first mobile low-power nuclear power plant", "transportable land-based nuclear-fueled power plant", "power self-propelled power plant", "water-moderated reactor", "atoms for peace history", "«V» Laboratory"]
rubric = "historyofscience"
rubric_name = "History of science"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.1.14"

+++

Until the mid-1950s, scientists and engineers at the Obninsk Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE) had worked out a number of unique projects that served as the foundation for the development of domestic and world nuclear power engineering. The list of these projects includes, in particular, TES-3, the first mobile nuclear power plant, which has become a symbol of small-scale nuclear power engineering, a historical achievement of Russian scientists, and part of the heritage of the «city of peaceful atom».

TES-3, a demonstration and experimental plant, being one of the possible nuclear power sources for remote areas, was a mobile power-generating unit consisting of four tracked platforms with a reactor unit equipped with a water-cooled water-moderated reactor with a 1.5 MW turbogenerator. The «self-propelled uranium-fueled machine» was created in record time due to the scale and cooperation of the project participants under the scientific guidance of the «V» Laboratory staff. The plant showed reliability in operation, good controllability, safety and maintainability. Over the entire operating period in the power generation mode, TES-3 worked for about 1300 hours without any radiation accidents. After the completion of the first fuel campaign in 1965, the reactor was shut down, but the idea of mobile large-component low-power nuclear plants was further developed in the form of mobile nuclear power plants of the next generation.

### References

1. Petros’yants A.M. Third International Geneva Conference of Atomic Scientists. Atomnaya Energiya. 1964, v. 17, iss. 5, pp. 323-328. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t17-5_1964/go,2/ (accessed Nov. 24, 2021) (in Russian).
2. Sinev N.M., Krasin A.K., Bychkov I.F., Blokhin O.I., Broder D.L., Gabrusev V.N., Dudnikov Yu.V., Zhil’tsov V.A., Koptev M.A., Komarov A.Ya., Kotov A.P., Lantsov M.N., Lisochkin G.A., Merzlikin G.A., Morozov I.G., Orekhov Yu.I., Sergeev Yu.A., Slyusarev P.N., Ushakov G.N., Fedorov N.V., Chernyy V.Ya., Shmelev V.M. TES-3 Compact Atomic Power Station. Atomnaya Energiya. 1964, v. 17, iss. 6, pp. 448-452. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t17-6_1964/go,24/ (accessed Nov. 24, 2021); DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01122767 (in Russian).
3. Bochvar A.A. Visit of the US AEC Delegation to the Soviet Union. Atomnaya Energiya. 1963, v. 15, iss. 1, pp. 91-93. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t15-1_1963/go,92/ (accessed Nov. 24, 2021) (in Russian).
4. Frolov Yu.V., Levchenko Yu.A., Gromyko A.Yu. Moments of Our History. Obninsk. SSC RF-FEI JSC Publ., 2021, pp. 38-39 (in Russian). ISBN 978-5-907108-26-4.
5. Kosheleva N. A New Historical Monument May Appear in Obninsk, Completely Different from Others. NG Region. 11.11.2021. Available at: http://ngregion.ru/initsiativa/v-obninske-mozhet-poyavitsya-novyj-istoricheskij-pamyatnik-sovershenno-ne-pokhozhij-na-drugie (accessed Nov. 24, 2021) (in Russian).