+++

categories="article"
date="2023-06-22T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/02.pdf"
first_page="14"
last_page="26"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Оценка нейтронно-физических свойств активной зоны реактора ВВЭР-1000 при использовании регенерированного уран-плутониевого топлива"
original_title="Evaluation of Neutronic Performance for the VVER-1000 Reactor Core with Regenerated Uranium-Plutonium Fuel"
authors=["SemishinVV"]
tags=["neutronic calculation", "reactor core", "VVER", "REMIX fuel", "SAPPHIRE", "DESNA", "closed nuclear fuel cycle", "plutonium", "uranium regenerate"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.02"

+++

The possibility has been considered for the VVER-1000 reactor fuel column to be formed based on regenerated fuel with the use of the spent fuel accumulated in reactors of the same type. A study was undertaken to investigate the change in the isotopic composition of the plutonium discharged from a thermal reactor in the course of its multiple reprocessing and recycle in a thermal neutron reactor. To obtain an equilibrium isotopic composition of the reactor-grade plutonium, 3D neutronic calculations were performed for the stationary fuel cycles of a VVER-1000 serial reactor with conventional oxide fuel and oxide fuel based on regenerated uranium and based on an undivided mixture of uranium and plutonium oxides from SNF. The neutronic performance of reactor cores was compared for the above fuel types in the course of fuel lifetime, including the following: in-core radial power density shaping, values of reactivity coefficients for various thermal parameters, reactivity control system efficiency, etc.

### References

1. Andrianova E.A., Davidenko V.D., Tsibul’skii V.F. Prospective Fuel Loads of Reactors in a Closed Fuel Cycle of Nuclear Power. Atomic Energy. 2015, v. 118, iss. 5, pp. 301-306; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-9997-2 .
2. Davidenko V.D., Tsibul’skii S.V. Effective Method of Burning Power-Grade Plutonium in VVER. Atomic Energy. 2015, v. 118, iss. 3, pp. 170-173; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-9973-x .
3. Grouiller J., Boucher L., Guillet J. et al. French Strategies and Scenarios for Plutonium and Long Lived Radionuclides Management from the Today PWR Park Towards GEN IV Systems. In: Proc. of Global’2003. Atoms for Prosperity: Apdating Elsenh. Global Vision for Nuclear Energy. USA, Nov. 16-20 2003, pp. 130 - 134.
4. Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A., Zil’berman B.Ya., Kudryavtsev E.G. Use of Recovered Uranium and Plutonium in Thermal Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2005, v. 99, iss. 2, pp. 572-576; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-005-0248-9 .
5. Adamov E.O., Mochalov Y.S., Rachkov V.I., Khomyakov Yu.S., Shadrin A.Yu., Kascheev V.A., Khaperskaya A.V. Spent Nuclear Fuel Reprocessing and Nuclear Materials Recycling in Two-Component Nuclear Energy. Atomic Energy. 2021, v. 130, iss. 1, pp. 29-35; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00769-w .
6. Semchenkov Yu.M. Fuel Use in VVER Reactors: State and Prospects. Rosenergoatom, 2014, no. 11, pp. 8-13. Avaibale at: http://nrcki.ru/files/pdf/1463658870.pdf (accessed Feb. 22, 2023) (in Russian).
7. Tebin V.V., Obuhov V.V, Sergeev V.K., Ivanov A.S. The Project of the SAPPHIRE Software Package for Solving the Problems of Calculating the Reactor Cell. VANT. Ser. Fizika i Tekhnika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 1985, v. 111, iss. 4, pp. 68-71 (in Russian).
8. Karpov A.S., Tebin V.V. A system for Preparing Multigroup Constants for Fissile Materials Based on the Estimated Nuclear Data of the SAPPHIRE Package. Proc. of the X*th Symp. on Nuclear Reactors Physics Problems «Volga*97», Sep. 2-6, 1997. Moscow, 1997, 191 p. (in Russian).
9. Kavun O.Yu. The Method of Modeling the Dynamics of the NPP Power Unit Implemented in the RADUGA-EU Software Package. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 1999, iss. 2, pp. 17-39 (in Russian).
10. Semishin V.V., Kavun O.Yu. Investigation of the Possibility of Closing the Fuel Cycle for the VVER-1000 Reactor. Proc. of the XXX*th Sci.*Techn. Conf. «Neutron*Physical Problems of Nuclear Power Engineering», Nov. 27-29, 2019. Obninsk. IPPE JSC Publ., 2019, 108 p. ISBN 978-5-907108-18-9 (in Russian).
11. Proselkov V.N., Aleshin S.S., Popov S.G., Sidorenko V.D., Slavyagin P.D., Tataurov A.L., Milovanov O.V., Mikheev E.N., Anan’ev Yu.A., Pytkin Yu.N., Pimenov Yu.V. Analysis of the Possibility of Using Fuel Based on Reclaimed Uranium in VVER Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2003, v. 95, iss. 6, pp. 829-834; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/B:ATEN.0000018995.09337.b5 .
12. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kudryavtsev E.G., Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A. Neutron-Physical Characteristics of a VVER Core with 100% Load of Reprocessed Uranium and Plutonium Fuel. Atomic Energy. 2006, v. 101, iss. 6, pp. 863-868; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-006-0182-5 .
13. Pavlovichev A.M., Pavlov V.I., Semchenkov Yu.M., Kudryavtsev E.G., Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A., Zil’berman B.Ya. Neutron-Physical Characteristics of a VVER-1000 Core with 100% Fuel Load Consisting of a Mixture of Recovered Uranium and Plutonium and Enriched Uranium. Atomic Energy. 2008, v. 104, iss. 4, pp. 257-261; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-008-9025-x .
14. Bobrov E.A. Investigation of the Characteristics of the Fuel Cycle Closure of VVER Reactors Based on Remix Technology. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) Diss. Moscow. NRCentre «Kurchatov Institute» Publ., 2016, 129 p. Avaibale at: https://www.dissercat.com/content/issledovanie-kharakteristik-zamykaniya-toplivnogo-tsikla-reaktorov-vver-na-osnove-remiks-tek (accessed Feb. 22, 2023) (in Russian).