+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/03.pdf"
first_page="27"
last_page="40"
udc="621.039.517.5; 004.942"
title="Investigation of the Influence of the Fuel Element Design Parameter on the VVER-1000 Reactor Axial Power Peaking Factor"
original_title="Исследование влияния конструктивного параметра тепловыделяющего элемента на коэффициент неравномерности теплового выделения по высоте реактора ВВЭР-1000"
authors=["GorbunovVA", "TeplyakovaSS", "LonshakovNA", "AndrianovSG", "MineevPA"]
tags=["VVER-1000", "fuel element", "fuel pellet", "temperature field", "specific thermal power", "power peaking factor"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.03"

+++

The paper presents the results of a numerical study into the efficiency of the fuel element operation in the pressurized water reactor (VVER) core filled with uranium dioxide (UO2) pellets. The investigation results were obtained from a three-dimensional simulation of the fuel element power density. The dependencies of the fuel and fuel cladding temperatures on specific power per cubic meter of fuel are compared. Uranium metal and uranium dioxide have been studied as fuel. Engineering constraints on the safe operation of fuel assemblies have been selected as the determining parameters. The paper analyzes the extent of the radiation heat transfer effects on the fuel element specific power. Equations have been obtained that reflect the dependencies of specific power per cubic meter of fuel on the size of the fuel pellet hole diameter in the maximum heat flux conditions. The COMSOL Multiphysics code, a numerical thermophysical simulation package, was used for the study. Calculations show that an additional uranium-235 enrichment with an increase in the fuel pellet hole diameter at a fixed fuel thermal power leads to a reduced reactor axial temperature field peaking factor.

### References

1. Kolpakov G.N., Selivanikova O.V. Designs of Fuel Rods, Channels and Cores of Power Reactors. Tomsk. Tomskyj Politihnichesky Universitet Publ., 2009, 118 p. (in Russian).
2. Leskin S.T., Shelegov A.S., Slobodchuk V.I. Physical Features and Design of the VVER-1000 Reactor. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2011, 116 p. (in Russian).
3. Gorbunov V.A. Simulation of Thermohydraulic Processes in Nuclear Reactors in COMSOL Multiphysics. Ivanovo. Ivanovsky Gosudarstvenny Energetichesky Universitet Publ., 2019, 180 p. ISBN 978-5-00062-393-0 (in Russian).
4. Chirkin V.S. Thermophysical Properties of Nuclear Engineering Materials. Moskow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968, 484 p. (in Russian).
5. Perimov R.R., Sorokin G.A., Sorokina T.V. Modeling of Thermal Mechanical Reliability of the Fuel Rod with Different Variants of Change of Energy; Guideline and Temperatures. Promyshlennaya Teplotekhnika. 2004, v. 26, iss. 5, pp. 150-153 (in Russian).
6. Golcev A.O, Davydova G.B., Davidenko V.D. The Influence of Depression of the Neutron Flux in the RBMK Cell on the Magnitude of the Maximum and Average Fuel Temperature. Izvestiya Tomskogo Politekhnicheskogo Universiteta. 2009, v. 314, iss. 4, pp. 5-7 (in Russian).
7. Design Codes of New Generation. Available at: http://www.ibrae.ac.ru/contents/68/ (accessed Nov. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
8. Velesjuk A., Morgunov I. CFD’s Codes: Problems and Prospects in Nuclear Power Engineering. Atomnyj Ekspert. Appendix to Atomnaya Energiya.1990, no. 8, pp. 37-39 (in Russian).
9. Kartashov K.V., Bogoslovskaya G.P. Calculations for Optimization of Geometric and Regime Parameters of VVER SKD Fuel Assemblies for Different Operating Modes of the Reactor at Supercritical Water Parameters. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 2, pp. 3-11; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2012.2.12 (in Russian)/
10. Starkov V.A., Marihin N.Yu. Method and Program of Calculation of Stationary Temperature Field in the System of Multi Zone Cylindrical Fuel Rods. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 1, pp. 54-62; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2013.1.08 (in Russian).
11. Gorbunov V.A. Experience in Using the Software Complex at Ivanovo State Power Engineering University n.a. V.I. Lenin. ANSYS Advantage (Russkaya Redaktsiya). 2011, no. 15, pp. 38-39 (in Russian).
12. Heat Transfer Module User’s Guide, Version COMSOL 3.5.2005. 216 p. Available at: https://extras.csc.fi/math/comsol/3.5/doc/ht/htug.pdf (accessed Nov. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
13. Gorbunov V.A. Heat Transfer Simulation in the Finite Element FEMLAB Package. Ivanovo. Ivanovsky Gosudarstvenny Energetichesky Universitet Publ., 2008, 216 p. ISBN 978-5-89482-518-2 (in Russian).
14. Biryulin G.V. Thermophysical Calculations in the COMSOL/FEMLAB Finite Element Package. Saint-Petersburg,. SPb GUITMO Publ., 2006, 76 p (in Russian).
15. Dementiev B.A. Nuclear Power Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990, 352 p. ISBN 5-283-03836-X (in Russian).
16. Ilchenko A.G. Thermohydraulics of Reactor Installations: a Textbook. Ivanovo. Ivanovsky Gosudarstvenny Energetichesky Universitet Publ., 2005. 160 p. ISBN 5-89482-347-1 (in Russian).
17. Gorbunov V.A., Ivanova N.B., Lonshakov N.A., Belov Ya.V. Development of a Model for Determining the Fuel Element Temperature Field in a Two-Dimensional Formulation of the Problem. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2. pp. 174-184; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.15 (in Russian).
18. Dolgov A. Effective Fuel Solutions Using SNF Reprocessing. Proc. of the Tvel JSC International Forum «AtomExpo», Moscow, May 31, 2016.
19. Gorbunov V.A., Andrianov S.G., Konoval’ceva S.S. Assessment of the Effect of Radiation Heat Transfer on the Parameters of the Temperature Fields of Fuel Rods of Various Design. Vestnik IGEU. 2021, no 2. pp. 23-31; DOI: https://doi.org/10.17588/2072-2672.2021.2.023-031 (in Russian).
20. Vargraftik N.B. Handbook of Thermophysical Properties of Gases and Liquids. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1972. 720 p. (in Russian).
21. The Density of Uranium and its Thermophysical Properties at Various. Available at: http://thermalinfo.ru/svojstva-materialov/metally-i-splavy/plotnost-urana-i-ego-teplofizicheskie-svojstva-pri-razlichnyh-temperaturah (accessed Nov. 20, 2022) (in Russian).