+++

categories="article"
date="2023-06-22T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/04.pdf"
first_page="41"
last_page="55"
udc="621.34"
title="A Model of the Coolant Flow in Supercritical Nuclear Reactors Based on the Highest Approximations of the Chapman-Enskog Method"
original_title="Модель течения теплоносителя в ядерных реакторах со сверхкритическими параметрами на основе высших приближений метода Чепмена--Энскога"
authors=["ChusovIA"]
tags=["nuclear reactor", "Burnett equations", "transverse leakage", "coolant flow method", "Chapman-Enskog method", "parabolic equation", "nonlinear orthogonal transformation"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.04"

+++

Among a number of the reactor types, identified by the international GIF-IV program as advanced facilities, the most promising concept is that of a supercritical reactor plant. Close consideration is given to reactors of this type due to the possibility of obtaining a higher efficiency, as compared with the PWR-type reactor facility, thanks to improving the reactor’s operating parameters (higher in-core temperature and pressure) and using the supercritical Brayton cycle instead of the Rankine cycle. The supercritical coolant flow in the reactor flow area is characterized by the fact that the change in the flow enthalpy is much greater than the characteristic value of kinetic energy. Besides, the flow in the reactor core flow area is accompanied by a major change in the thermophysical properties of the coolant. The coolant flow is realized in conditions for the parametric Knudsen and Reynolds numbers, Kn → 0, Re >> O(1). With such values of the mode parameters, the Burnett terms in the momentum equation have the same order as the Navier-Stokes terms, and, in the event of turbulent flows, the same order as the «apparent» Reynolds turbulence stresses.

Reducing molecular kinetic equations to macroscopic equations is one of the fundamental problems in continuum mechanics. At the present time, this procedure uses the classical Chapman-Enskog approach to resolving the Boltzmann-Maxwell kinetic equation. The final result of using the method is a chain of Euler equations, Navier-Stokes equations, higher approximation equations (Burnett equations, super-Burnett approximation), etc. The proposed model is based on taking into account the contribution of the Burnett terms to the overall balance of forces and their work in transfer equations. The terms, taking into account the thermal convection effects, are introduced to the stress tensor, based on the Chapman-Enskog method. The most general form of initial equations and their parabolized form are presented, which allow taking into account the transverse overflows in fuel assemblies, the effects of gravity and the buoyancy force that acts on the coolant. A method has been proposed for simplifying initial equations based on using the Prandtl-Mises transformation. The transformation makes it possible to simplify considerably the initial equations and reduce these to an equation of the heat conductivity equation type.

### References

1. Generation IV International Forum SCWR System Steering Committee. Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems System Research Plan for the Supercritical Water6cooled Reactor, Rev. 0. 2007.
2. Kirillov P.L. Supercritical Parameters are the Future of Water-cooled Reactors and Nuclear Power Plants. Review. Atomnaya Tekhnika za Rubezhom. 2001, no. 6, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
3. Baranaev Yu.D., Kirillov P.L., Poplavskij V.M., Sharapov V.N. Supercritical Pressure Water Nuclear Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2004, v. 96, pp. 345-351; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/B:ATEN.0000038101.90666.da .
4. Kurganov V.A., Zejgarnik Yu.A., Yan’kov G.G., Maslakova I.V. Heat Transfer and Resistance in Pipes at Supercritical Coolant Pressures: Results of Scientific Research and Practical Recommendations. Moscow. Pechatny salon Shans Publ., 2018, 304 p. (in Russian).
5. Kurganov V.A., Maslakova I.V. Normal and Degraded Heat Transfer During Heating in Pipes of Turbulent Flows of Heat Carriers with Variable Physical Properties. Teplofizika Vysokih Temperatur. 2016, v. 54, iss. 4, pp. 609-631; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0018151X16040131 (in Russian).
6. Anand S., Suresh S., Santhosh Kumar D. Numerical Investigation of Supercritical Heat Transfer of Water Flowing in Vertical and Horizontal Tube with Emphasis of Gravity Effect. Journal of Thermal Engineering. 2020, v. 7, no. 6, pp. 1541-1555; DOI: https://doi.org/10.18186/thermal.991098 .
7. Heat Transfer and Resistance in Pipes at Supercritical Coolant Pressures: Results of Scientific Research and Practical Recommendations. Scientific and Technical Report. Ed. Kurganov V.A. Moscow. OIVT RAN Publ., 2010, 228 p. (in Russian).
8. Shitsman M.E. Degraded Heat Transfer Modes at Supercritical Pressures. Teplofizika Vysokih Temperatur. 1963, v. 1, no. 2, pp. 267-275 (in Russian).
9. Shitsman M.E. Features of the Temperature Regime in Pipes at Supercritical Pressures. Teploenergetika. 1968, no. 5, pp. 57-61 (in Russian).
10. Kogan N.M. Dynamics of a Rarefied Gas. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1967, 440 p. (in Russian).
11. Lumpkin F.E., Chapman D.R. Accuracy of the Burnett Equations for Hypersonic Real Gas Flow. AIAA Paper. 1991, no. 0171, p. 17.
12. Galkin V.S., Kogan M.N., Fridlender O.G. On Some Kinetic Effects in Continuum Flows. Izvestiya AN SSSR. MZhG. 1970, no. 3, pp. 13-21 (in Russian).
13. Galkin V.S., Kogan M.N., Fridlender O.G. About Free Convection in Gas in the Absence of External Forces. Izvestiya AN SSSR. MZhG. 1971, no. 3, pp. 98-107 (in Russian).
14. Dragunov Yu.G., Ryzhov S.B., Vasil’chenko I.N., Kobelev S.N., V’yalitsin N.N. The Project of the Core for RU NPP-2006. Proc. of the V6th Int. Conf. «Obespechenie bezopasnosti AES s VVER». Podol’sk. FGUP Gidropress OKB Publ., 2006, pp. 1-11 (in Russian).
15. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A. An Integral Approach to the Calculation of Hydrodynamics and Temperature Fields of the Coolant in Shell6type Reactors with Shell6less Fuel Assemblies. Vol. 1. Moscow. MEI Publ., 1998, pp. 139-142 (in Russian).
16. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A., Karpenko A.A. Development of an Integral Approach for Calculating Thermal Fields and Coolant Hydrodynamics in Shell-type Reactors with Shell-less Fuel Assemblies. Proc. of the Intern. Congress «Energetika-3000», Oct. 16-20, 2000, p. 88 (in Russian).
17. Avdeev E.F., Chusov I.A., Karpenko A.A. An Integral Model for Calculating the Thermohydraulic Parameters of a Coolant in the Core of Hull-type Reactors with Uncoated  Fuel Assemblies. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2004, no. 3, pp. 79-89. Available at: https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/journals/2004/03.pdf (accessed Feb. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
18. Samoylov A.G. Fuel Elements of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1985, 222 p. (in Russian).
19. Samoylov A.G., Volkov V.S., Solonin M.I. Fuel Elements of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1996, 398 p. (in Russian).
20. Lapin Yu.V.,Strelets M.H. Internal Flows of Gas Mixtures. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1989, 368 p. (in Russian).
21. Rouch P. Fundamentals of Computational Fluid Dynamics. Hermosa Pub.,1998, 648 p.
22. Shih Tien-Mo. Numerical Heat Transfer. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1988, 544 p. ISBN 5-03-001215-X (in Russian).
23. Anderson D., Tannenhil J., Pletcher R. Computation Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. Hemisphere Publishing Corp.,1984, 794 p. ISBN 5-03-001928-6.