+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/05.pdf"
first_page="56"
last_page="68"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Влияние библиотек оцененных ядерных данных на результаты расчёта выгорания топлива с минорными актинидами в реакторе ВВЭР"
original_title="Effects of Evaluated Nuclear Data Libraries on the Calculation Results for Fuel Burnup with Minor Actinides in a VVER Reactor"
authors=["KarpovichGV", "KazanskyYA", "BakhantsovKA", "IsanovKA", "KushnirNO"]
tags=["minor actinides", "evaluated nuclear data libraries", "nuclear fuel", "burnup", "VVER reactor", "Monte Carlo method", "calculation accuracy"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.05"

+++

The paper deals with assessing the effects of the ENDF/B-VI.8, ENDF/B-VII.0, JEFF 3.1 and JEFF 3.1.1 nuclear data libraries on the results of calculating a number of functionals for a system based on a VVER reactor with fuel with a large fraction of minor actinides (up to 10%). Key estimates have been obtained for the errors introduced by libraries in calculations of systems with minor actinides (MA) based on a VVER-1200 reactor:

– for reactivity, σρ = 0.3 βeff;

– for isotopic compositions with minor actinides, ≤ 5% (the error for each particular isotope is different);

– for the total mass of accumulated MAs, εm = 0.8%.

Conclusions have been made with respect to the need for the further refinement of the library MA data proceeding from the nature of the calculation tasks that dictate the requirements for the accuracy of nuclear constants. It has been shown that systems based on VVER-1000/1200/3000 reactors with MAs need to be calculated using several libraries of evaluated nuclear data created at different organizations and based on the largest possible number of non-recurrent sets of experimental data.

### References

1. International Atomic Energy Agency. Use of Fast Reactors for Actinide Transmutation. Proceedings of a Specialists Meeting, Obninsk, Russian Federation, 22&24 September 1992, IAEA-TECDOC-693, IAEA, Vienna, 1993, 128 p. Available at: https://www.iaea.org/publications/955/use-of-fast-reactors-for-actinide-transmutation-proceedings-of-a-specialists-meeting-obninsk-russian-federation-22-24-september-1992 (accessed Apr. 27, 2023).
2. Kolobashkin V.V., Rubtsov P.M., Ruzhansky P.A., Sidorenko V.D. Radiation Characteristics of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel. Handbook. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 384 p. (in Russian).
3. Blokhin A.I., Blokhin D.A., Manokhin V.N., Mitenkova E.F., Novikov N.V., Sipachev I.V., Solovyeva E.V. Intercomparison of Actinide Nuclear Data for Transmutation. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 2008, iss. 1-2., pp. 1-19. Available at: https://elibrary.ru/item.asp?id=24328743 (accessed Apr. 27, 2023) (in Russian).
4. McLane Victoria and Members of the Cross Section Evaluation Working Group. ENDF/B-VI Summary Documentation. National Nuclear Data Center USA, 1996, 304 p. Available at: https://www-nds.iaea.org/public/documents/endf/endf201/endf-201.pdf (accessed Apr. 27, 2023).
5. Chadwick M.B., Oblozhinsky P. et al. ENDF/B-VII.0: Next Generation Evaluated Nuclear Data Library for Nuclear Science and Technology. Nuclear Data Sheets, 2006, v. 107, iss. 12, pp. 2931-3060; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nds.2006.11.001 .
6. Leppaanen Jaakko. Serpent – a Continuous&energy Monte&Carlo Reactor Physics Burnup Calculation Code. User’s Manual. Helsinki: VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2015, 164 p. Available at: http://montecarlo.vtt.fi/download/Serpent_manual.pdf (accessed Apr. 27, 2023).
7. Leppaanen J., Viitanen T. Cross Section Libraries for Serpent 1.1.7., Espoo. Helsinki. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2013, 58 p.
8. Leconte P., Antony M., Archier P., Bernard D., De Saint Jean C., Di Salvo J., Eschbach R., Geslot B., Gruel A., Tamagno P., Truchet G., Hudelot J.P. Validation of Actinide Nuclear Data Based on Reactivity Worth Experiments in a MOX-LWR Spectrum. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2020, v. 139, pp. 1-15; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107251 .
9. Pandikumar G., Gopalakrishnan V., Mohanakrishnan P. Impact of Spread in Minor Actinide Data from ENDF/B-VII.0, ENDF/B-VI.8, JENDL-3.3 and JEFF-3.0 on an IAEA-CRP FBR Benchmark for MA Incineration. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2008, v. 35, pp. 1519-1534; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2008.01.004 .