+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/06.pdf"
first_page="69"
last_page="80"
udc="621.039.546"
title="Development of a Method for Nondestructive Control of the Helium Concentration in Fuel Elements for Advanced Nuclear Power Plants"
original_title="Разработка метода неразрушающего контроля концентрации гелия в тепловыделяющих элементах для перспективных ядерных энергетических установок"
authors=["DvornikovPA", "KovtunSN", "KudryaevAA", "ShutovSS", "ShutovPS", "BudarinAA", "LukyanovDA", "KrasnikovYuV", "StepanovAM", "StarodubtsevAV", "GorbachevMK", "IlyashikMI", "NikulinAS", "DunaevVI"]
tags=["helium concentration control", "fuel element", "thermal method", "temperature", "gas cavity", "maximum heating of fuel cladding", "random component of measurement error", "nuclear power plants"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.06"

+++

The paper analyzes recent studies on the application of a nondestructive thermal method for monitoring the helium concentration in fuel elements of advanced reactors, which use fuel elements beneath the cladding of which there is helium under atmospheric pressure. The results are presented from the studies for determining the optimal position of the helium concentration control point in the gas cavity of different fuel element types: for fuel elements with free gas cavities and for fuel elements with gas cavities with support. The fuel cladding maximum heating value is used as the informative feature in measuring the fuel element helium concentration. It has been found experimentally that the functional relationship between the helium concentration in the fuel element and the maximum heating value of the fuel element mockup cladding has a linear form. Using a thermal method to control the fuel element helium concentration allows reducing the element fabrication costs, and also contributes to improving the operating safety of advanced nuclear power plants.

### References

1. Development, Production and Operation of Fuel Elements. Book 2. Ed. by D.G. Reshetnikov. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1995, pp. 286-288 (in Russian).
2. Krasnikov Yu.V., Dvornikov P.A., Kovtun S.N., Polionov V.P., Shutov P.S., Starodubtsev A.V., Stepanov A.M. Patent RU No. 2634309 Method of Measuring Helium Concentration in Fuel Element. Published on Oct. 25, 2017. Available at: https://yandex.ru/patents/doc/RU2634309C1_20171025 (accessed Dec. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
3. Dvornikov P.A., Kovtun S.N., Kudryaev A.A., Budarin A.A., Lukyanov D.A., Shutov P.S., Shutov S.S., Gormakov A.G., Milshin V.I., Oznobishina M.D.Patent RU No. 2760561 Apparatus for Measuring the Concentration of Helium in a Fuel Element (FE). Published on Nov. 29, 2021. Available at: https://patents.google.com/patent/RU2760561C1/ru (accessed Dec. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
4. Vargaftik N.B. Handbook of Thermophysical Properties of Gases and Liquids. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1997, 720 p. (in Russian).
5. Dvornikov P.A., Kovtun S.N., Kudryaev A.A., Budarin A.A., Lukyanov D.A., Shutov P.S., Shutov S.S., Gormakov A.G., Milshin V.I., Oznobishina M.D. Patent RU No. 2760492 Fuel Element of Nuclear Reactor. Published on Nov. 25, 2021. Available at: https://patents.s3.yandex.net/RU2760492C1_20211125.pdf (accessed Dec. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
6. Krasnikov Yu.V., Stepanov A.M., Starodubtsev A.V. Patent RU No. 2772652 Method for Measuring Helium Concentration in a Fuel Element. Published on May 23, 2022. Available at: https://patents.s3.yandex.net/RU2772652C1_20220523.pdf (accessed Dec. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
7. GOST R 8.736-2011. Multiple Direct Measurements. Methods of Measurement Results Processing. Main Principles. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200089016/ (accessed Dec. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
8. GOST 15150-69. Machines, Instruments and other Industrial Products. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200003320/ (accessed Dec. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
9. Chirkin V.S. Thermophysical Properties of Nuclear Engineering Materials. Handbook. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 2016, 484 p. (in Russian)
10. Babichev A.P., Babushkina N.A., Bratkovsky A.M., Physical Quantities. Handbook. Eds. I.S. Grigoriev, E.Z. Meilikhova. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1991, 1232 p. (in Russian).