+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/07.pdf"
first_page="81"
last_page="92"
udc="621.039.546"
title="Calculation and Experimental Studies for the Spent Nuclear Fuel Shipping Cask Sealing Assembly"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальные исследования узла герметизации контейнера для транспортирования облученного ядерного топлива"
authors=["GaiazovAZ", "GaiazovOZ", "KozlovVYu", "PavlovSV", "SamsonovAA"]
tags=["cask", "leak-tightness", "tests", "numerical simulation", "sealing assembly", "strain", "seal"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.07"

+++

One of the safety requirements with respect to the shipping cask for spent nuclear fuel is that its leak-tightness should be maintained by preserving the cask body structural integrity and the sealing system tightness under normal and emergency transportation conditions.

The cask under design has a cylindrical process penetration (port) in its bottom which is sealed using a plug with a radial seal composed of two rubber O-rings. The cask sealing assembly design was justified by the ANSYS LS-DYNA code calculation results. In particular, strains of the cask components were calculated that are caused by the cask drop from a height of 1 m with the cask sealing assembly hitting a vertical bar. The cask was concluded to be leak-tight or leaky based on the strain nature and amount. To verify the adequacy of the results, computer-aided and realistic simulations were undertaken with a 1:2.5-scale mockup cask dropped onto a bar from a height of 1 m. The computational and experimental results show a good agreement in terms of the impact response accelerations (overloads) for the mockup cask and bar collision and in terms of the plastic strains for the key components of the mockup bottom port sealing assembly. This proves the adequacy of the numerical cask model that has been developed and the efficiency of the LS-DYNA simulations. The calculations show that the plastic strains in the cask bottom port region lead to a smaller force of the inner rubber O-ring compression by the port walls, this causing the inner radial seal to lose its tightness. At the same time, the outer seal remains leak-tight ensuring so the mockup cask tightness. The physical test results have also confirmed that the mockup cask remains leak-tight.

### References

1. NP-053-16. Federal Standards and Regulations for the Use of Nuclear Energy. Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. Available at: https://ohranatruda.ru/upload/iblock/1cf/4293748284.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
2. SSR-6. Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material. Specific Safety Requirements. Available at: https://gnssn.iaea.org/CSN/School%20of%20Drafting%20Regulations%20RIDP/SSR-6%202012%20Edition.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023).
3. GOST R 51964-2002 Packages with Spent Nuclear Fuel. Types and Main Parameters. Available at: https://ohranatruda.ru/upload/iblock/ecf/4294816146.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
4. PBYa-06-09-2016. Nuclear Safety Regulations for Storage and Transportation of Nuclear Fissile Materials. Available at: https://files.stroyinf.ru/Data2/1/4293746/4293746881.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
5. SanPiN 2.6.1.1281-03. Sanitary Rules for Radiation Safety of Personnel and Public during Transportation of Radioactive Materials (Substances). Available at: https://base.garant.ru/4179203/ (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
6. SP 2.6.1.2612 10. Main Sanitary Regulations for Radiation Safety (OSPORB 99/2010). Available at: https://orfi.ru/files/doc/uchcenter/osporb_2612612-10.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
7. RB 039-07. Advisory Material for the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material. Available at: https://gosthelp.ru/text/RB03907Obespecheniebezopa.html (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
8. GOST 9833-73. Rubber Toroidal Sealing Rings for Hydraulic and Pneumatic Equipment. Available at: https://rags.ru/gosts/gost/36935/ (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
9. ТU 2531 002-28943826-2009. Rubber Sealing Rings for Nuclear Equipment. Technical Specifications. Moscow. Reaten R&D Company Publ., 2009, 48 p. (in Russian).
10. GOST 5632-2014. High!Alloy Steels and Corrosion!Proof, Heat!Resisting and Heat Treated Alloys. Grades. Available at: https://kontinental.ru/upload/gost/gost%205632-2014.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
11. GOST R 50.05.01-2018. Conformity Assessment System for the Use of Nuclear Energy. Conformity Assessment as Examination. Unified Procedures. Leak Testing. Gaseous and Liquid Methods. Available at: https://files.stroyinf.ru/Data2/1/4293739/4293739651.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
12. LS-DYNA Software (CD-ROM). Livermore Software Technology Corp. (240 files).
13. Software Certificate No. 394 dated July 14, 2016. Software: ANSYS LSDYNA. Issued by the Federal Budgetary Institution «Research and Development Center for Nuclear and Radiation Safety», Moscow.
14. Barulina M.A. Application of ANSYS Workbench for Geometrical Models. Moscow. Editus Publ., 2012, 316 p. (in Russian).
15. PNAE G-7-002-86. Strength Analysis Standards for Equipment and Piping of Nuclear Power Installations. Available at: http://vol-nrs.gosnadzor.ru/about/documents/%D0%9F%D0%B5%D1%80%D0%B5%D1%87%D0%B5%D0%BD%D1%8C%20%D0%B4%D0%B5%D0%B9%D1%81%D1%82%D0%B2%D1%83%D1%8E%D1%89%D0%B8%D1%85%20%D0%A4%D0%9D%D0%9F/%D0%A4%D0%9D%D0%9F%201-20/%D0%9F%D0%9D%D0%90%D0%AD%20%D0%93-7-002-86.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
16. Bankina O.S., Dzyuba A.S., Khvatan A.M.. Plotting Methods of «S-E» Deformation Curves Basing on the Reference Mechanical Characteristics of Material. Central Aerohydrodynamic Institute Publications. 2000, iss. 2639, pp. 36-38 (in Russian).
17. Physical Properties of Steels and Alloys Used in the Power Industry. Handbook. Ed. B.E. Neimark. Moscow – Leningrad. Energia Publ., 1967 (in Russian).
18. Khoroshkina G.P., Mikhailov N.Ya., Uchaev A.A. Physical and Mechanical Properties of Structural Materials and Some Modern Techniques for Their Study. Reference Book. Moscow, TsNIIAtomInform Publ., 1982 (in Russian).
19. GOST 380-2005. Common Quality Carbon Steel. Grades. Available at: https://internet-law.ru/gosts/gost/5550/ (accessed Jan. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
20. Акселерометры серии 350. Свидетельство об утверждении типа средств измерений № 62537. ФБУ «Ростест-Москва», 2015.
20. Accelerometers Series 350. Pattern Approval Certificate of Measuring Instruments No. 62537. Rostest-Moscow, 2015 (in Russian).