+++

categories="article"
date="2023-06-22T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2023-02"
issue_name="2023 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/02/10.pdf"
first_page="121"
last_page="133"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Calculation Tools Used for the Computational Support of Operating Fast Reactors"
original_title="Расчетные инструменты, применяемые в сопровождении действующих быстрых реакторов"
authors=["ZarapinaEM", "StogovVY", "MishinVA", "KhnykinaES"]
tags=["fast neutron reactor", "two-component nuclear power system", "operation support", "computational support", "neutronic code", "database", "diffusion approximation", "Monte Carlo method"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.10"

+++

The timeliness of this paper is defined by the global issues specific to the current nuclear power, including handling of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) and radioactive waste (RW), and efficiency of using the energy potential of natural uranium resources.

The transition to the so-called «two-component» nuclear power system (NES) that combines reactors with thermal and fast neutron spectra operating in a single closed nuclear fuel cycle, makes it possible to resolve the above issues in the safest and most cost effective way, and paves the way for extensive nonelectric use of nuclear energy in production of «useful» isotopes for medical and industrial applications.

The decision to start this transition was made by the management of Rosatom State

Corporation with regard for the experience of successfully operating the Beloyarsk NPP’s unit 3 with a BN-600 reactor (for over 40 years) and unit 4 with a BN-800 reactor (for 6 years).

Computational support activities have been undertaken throughout the BN-600 reactor operation period. Prior to each cycle between refueling, neutronic calculations are performed by three organizations: Beloyarsk NPP (Operator), IPPE JSC (Research Adviser), and Afrikantov OKBM JSC (Chief Designer). Coupled neutronic calculations makes it possible to ensure the safety and reliability of the reactor operation in each particular core loading.

The commissioning of the BN-800 reactor and the feasibility of a closed fuel cycle have extended the computational support application scope. The paper describes the computational support techniques for IPPE JSC as the research adviser organization, and for the prospects for the development of computational support.

### References

1. Alekseev P.N., Alekseev S.V., Andrianova E.A., Asmolov V.G., Dekusar V.M., Zrodnikov A.V., Kagramanyan V.S., Koltun O.V., Pavlov A.S., Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N., Subbotin S.A., Temishev R.R., Teplov P.S., Usanov V.I., Tsibulsky V.F. A Two0Component Nuclear Power System with Thermal and Fast Reactors in a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Ed. by N.N. Ponomarev-Stepnoy. Moscow. Tekhnosfera Publ., 2016, 169 p. ISBN 978-5-94836-434-6. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/dvuhkomponentnaya-yadernaya-systema_2016/go,0/ (accessed Dec. 05, 2022) (in Russian).
2. Moiseyev A.V. System of Modeling and Calculation Analysis of Neutron-Physical Experiments at Fast Reactors. IYNC02008 Proceedings, Interlaken, Switzerland, September 21-26, 2008.
3. Certificate of State Registration of the TRIGEX Computer Program Reg. No. 2013660588 Dated 11.11.2013 (in Russian).
4. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsybulya A.M. The System of Group Constants BNAB-93. Part 1: Nuclear Constants for Calculating Neutron and Photon Radiation Fields. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 1996, iss. 1, p. 59 (in Russian).
5. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. CONSYST Code for Neutron Constants Preparation. Scope Statement: IPPE Preprint-2828. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2000, 72 p. (in Russian).
6. Gurskaya O.S., Korobeynikova L.V., Mishin V.A., Dzugkoeva E.M., Stogov V.Yu. Effect of Replacing of a Structural Steel on the Reactivity Reserve in the BN-600 Reactor. VANT. Ser. Yaderno0Reaktornye Konstanty. 2020, iss. 4, pp. 78-85. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2020/4/1936-9.html (accessed Dec. 05, 2022) (in Russian).
7. Dmitriev D.V., Dzugkoeva E.M. Computational Study of the Accumulation and Release of Gaseous Fission Products from Nitride Fuel in Experimental Fuel Assemblies. Proc. of the XXI0th Intern. Conf. of Young Professionals in Nuclear Power Plants. Podolsk, April 130 14, 2022. Podolsk. OKB GIDROPRESS JSC Publ., 2022, pp.311-316 (in Russian).
8. Software and Hardware Support Complex for the Operation of the BN-600 «GEFEST with the CONSYST Constant Preparation System and the BNAB-93 Library». Certification Passport of the Software Tool. Dated Dec. 16, 2015. No. 378 (in Russian).
9. Peregudov A.A., Kryachko M.V., Semenov M.Yu., Koscheyev V.N., Maslov P.F., Tormyshev I.V., Kunts’o G.A., Gurskaya O.S., Ivanov A.A., Yerpalov P.A. BNcode is an Improved Code for Scientific Support of Operating BN Reactors. VANT. Ser. Yaderno0 Reaktornye Konstanty. 2019, iss. 2, 2:8, pp. 77-86. Available at: https: https://-vant.ippe.ru/year2019/2/1706-8.html (accessed Dec. 05, 2022) (in Russian).
10. Certificate of State Registration of the MMKENO Computer Program. Reg. No. 2014610575 Dated Jan. 15, 2014 (in Russian).
11. Certificate of State Registration of the MMKC Computer Program. Reg. No. 2014612579 Dated Feb. 28, 2014 (in Russian).
12. Koscheyev V.N., Tormyshev I.V., Mishin V.A., Peregudov A.A., Raskach K.F., Semenov M.Yu., Yakunin A.A. CROSSER is a Software Module for Preparing Group Constants for Engineering Calculations of Fast Reactors. VANT. Ser. Yaderno0Reaktornye Konstanty. 2020, isso. 4, pp. 16-25. Available at: https: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2020/4/1929-2.html (accessed Dec. 05, 2022) (in Russian).
13. Zabrodskaya S.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Koscheyev V.N., Manokhin V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Pronyaev V.G. RUSFOND – Russian National Library of Estimated Neutron Data. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2007/neutron-constants/543-1.html (accessed Dec. 05, 2022) (in Russian).
14. Certificate of State Registration of the MIF Computer Program. Reg. No. 2019613198 Dated March 12, 2019 (in Russian).
15. Semenov M.Yu., Mikhailov G.M., Peregudov A.A., Mishin V.A., Dyachenko Ya.V., Belov S.B., Kuznetsov A.E., Zheltyshev V.A., Lyapin E.P., Dubovoy G.Yu. Сomparative Analysis of Calculated and Experimental Discrepancies of Neutron-Physical Characteristics of BN-800. VANT. Ser. Yaderno0Reaktornye Konstanty. 2022, iss. 1, pp. 30-39. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2022/1/2113-3.html (accessed Dec. 05, 2022) (in Russian).