+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="18"
udc="51-74:[621.039.516.4 004.942+621.039.516.4]"
title="Сomputational Substantiation of Technological Characteristics of the Closure Stage of Nuclear Fuel Cycle Using Code VIZART"
original_title="Расчетное обоснование характеристик технологических переделов замыкающей стадии ядерного топливного цикла с использованием программного комплекса ВИЗАРТ"
authors=["MakeyevaIR", "PugachevVYu", "ShmidtOV", "RykunovaAA", "ShadrinAYu"]
tags=["technologies of the closure of nuclear fuel cycle", "code VIZART", "computational substantiation of technology characteristics"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.01"

+++

There exist different variants of organizing the closure of nuclear fuel cycle (CNFC) depending on fast reactor type, fuel types, station or centralized allocation of closed nuclear fuel cycle stages. One of the ways to verify and estimate engineering solution is mathematical modeling of radiochemical technology which in the end will allow to optimize composite technological process in order to increase effectiveness and reduce cost.

In order to calculate the balance of material flows of process circuits and individual production sections in the stationary and dynamic modes, with taking into account the isotopic composition evolution, a software package VIZART (Virtual Plant of Radiochemical Technologies) was developed, allowing the user to assemble the required sequence of operations for any part of the process scheme and perform the calculation of material balance for all flows of the circuit, as well as to optimize the equipment operating modes and provide the necessary data to justify the safety of certain limits and the entire process circuit.

The following capabilities of code VIZART for computational substantiation of CNFC technology design and characteristics are considered: material balance calculation, cyclogram creation, determination of the most loaded parts of processing lines, estimation of fissile materials accumulating in devices and intermediate vessels, optimization of productivity of nodes and devices.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Alexakhin R.M., Bolshov L.A., Dedul A.V., Orlov V.V., Pershukov V.A., Rachkov V.I., Tolstoukhov D.A. , Troyanov V.M. Project «Proryv» – the technological basis for large-scale nuclear power engineering. RAS Proceedings. Energy. 2015, no. 1, p. 5 – 12. Available at: https://www.elibrary.ru/download/elibrary_23112795_43973519.pdf (accessed Nov. 10, 2023) (in Russian).
2. Shmidt O.V., Tretyakova S.G., Evsyukova Yu.A., Makeyeva I.R., Dubosarsky V.G., Pugachev V.Yu., Rykunova A.A. Software Complex VIZART for Balance Calculations of Material Flow, Technologies of Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Atomic Energy. 2017, vol. 122, iss. 2, pp. 106 – 111. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0243-y
3. D.G. Modestov. The solution of equations of nuclear decay. VANT. Ser. Mathematical simulation of physical processes. 2006, iss. 3, pp. 54 – 58 (in Russian).
4. Shadrin A.Y., Dvoeglazov K.N., Maslennikov A.G., Kashcheev V.A., Tret’yakova S.G., Shmidt O.V., Vidanov V.L., Ustinov O.A., Volk V.I., Veselov S.N., Ishunin V.S. РH-process as a technology for reprocessing mixed uranium – plutonium fuel from BREST-Od-300 reactor. Radiochemistry. 2016, vol. 58, iss. 3, pp. 271 – 279. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1066362216030085 (in Russian).
5. Moiseev N.N. Mathematical problems of system analysis. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1981, 488 p. (in Russian).
6. Taha H.A. Operations research. An introduction. Moscow, Mir Publ., 1985, 479 p. (in Russian).
7. Alekseev V.M., Tikhomirov V.M., Fomin S.V. Optimal control. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1979, 432 p. (in Russian).
8. Glushkov V.M. The prediction based on expert appraisal. Cibernetics, 1969, no. 2, pp. 2-5 (in Russian). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01071082
9. Pospelov G.S., Ven V.N., Solodov V.M., Shafranskiy V.V., Erlikh A.I. The problem of program9target planning and control. M.: Nauka, 1980, 460 p. (in Russian).
10. Zoutendijk G. Methods of Feasible Directions. Elsever Publ., Amsterdam, 1960.
11. Himmelblau D. M. Aplied nonlinear programming. Moscow, Mir Publ., 1975, pp. 381-410 (in Russian).
12. Nelder J.A., Mead R. (1965). A Simplex Method for Function Minimization. The Computer Journal, 7(4), 308 – 313. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/7.4.308
13. Makeyeva I.R., Fayrushina L.R., Rykunova, Shmidt O.V., Shadrin A.Yu., Kascheev V.A. Cost Optimization for Nuclear Fuel Cycle Closure. Proc. of the Rosatom Conference «Fuel Cycle Closure for Nuclear Power Engineering based on Fast Reactorsх». Sochi, October, 28929, 2021, pp. 294-305 (in Russian).
14. Kashcheev V.A., Logunov M.V., Shadrin A.Y., Rykunova A.A., Shmidt O.V. Fractionation strategy for HLW from SNF reprocessing. Radioactive waste. 2022, no. 2 (19), pp. 6-16. DOI: https://doi.org/10.25283/2587-9707-2022-2-6-16 (in Russian).
15. Makeyeva I.R., Rykunova A.A., Dubosarsky V.G., Pugachev V.Yu., Shmidt O.V., Evsyukova Yu.A. Calculation and Optimization of Technology Parameters for Closing Stage of Nuclear Fuel Cycle using VIZART code. Proc. of GLOBAL 2017. September 24929, Seoul (Korea). 2017, paper EA-318-PD1.
16. Different Evolution: genetic algorithm for functional optimization. Available at: https://habrahabr.ru/post/171751/ (accessed Nov. 10, 2023) (in Russian).