+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/03.pdf"
first_page="37"
last_page="48"
udc="621.039"
title="Computational Simulation of the Heat and Mass Transfer Processes Occurring in the Containment of Novovoronezh NPP II’s Units 1 and 2"
original_title="Расчетное моделирование тепломассообменных процессов, протекающих в герметичной оболочке энергоблоков № 1, 2 Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["SolovievSL", "ShishovAV", "PovarovVP", "YaurovSV"]
tags=["NPP-2006", "ventilation", "CFD", "modernization", "containment", "operating experience", "numerical simulation", "steam generator"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.03"

+++

The paper presents information on the key approaches to the design of the containment ventilation system for units 1 and 2 of Novovoronezh NPP II (NPP-2006 project).

The authors have developed a CFD model for the containment of Novovoronezh NPP II’s units 1 and 2, which includes the key structural components and the basic equipment installed within the containment.

A series of the containment air temperature measurements was undertaken during power operation of the units. Based on the measured temperature values, a series of calculations was undertaken to determine the air temperature field inside the containment.

It is revealed that when ensuring the design characteristics of the cooling capacity of the ventilation system stages, the design parameters of the air temperature in the GO, walls and equipment are achieved. In addition, with proper mixing of the air in the GO, it is possible to significantly reduce the average air temperature in the most “hot” rooms.

Based on the calculation results, causes have been identified for the low efficiency of the ventilation system, and specific measures have been proposed for increasing significantly the system capacity.

The proposed approach to determining the characteristics of ventilation systems using modern methods of three-dimensional computational hydro-gas dynamics makes it possible to optimize and modernize existing ventilation systems, as well as to assess the efficiency of ventilation at the design stage of nuclear power plants. The developed and proposed CFD model makes it possible to do this at the modern level without resorting to bench/experimental modeling issues.

### References

1. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasilyev B.Yu., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.V., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPPs with VVER21000 reactors. From the physical fundamentals of operation to the design evolution. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010, 604 p. (in Russian).
2. Margulova T.Kh. Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook for universities.Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 1994, 288 p. (in Russian).
3. NP-036-05. Federal Standards and Regulations in the Field of Using Atomic Energy. Regulations for Installation and Operation of Ventilation Systems Important to Safety. FBU NTTs YaRB Publ., 2005, 14 p. (in Russian).
4. Tikhomirov K.V., Sergeenko E.S. Heat engineering, heat and gas supply and ventilation. Textbook for universities. 4th ed. Moscow. Stroyizdat Publ., 1991, 480 p. (in Russian).
5. Bogoslovsky V.N., Kokorin O.Ya., Petrov L.V. Air conditioning and refrigeration. Textbook for universities. Stroyizdat Publ., 1985, 367 p. (in Russian).
6. Kokorin O.Ya. Air conditioning facilities. Fundamentals of calculation and design. Textbook for universities. 2nd ed. Mashinostroyeniye Publ., 1978, 264 p. (in Russian).
7. Slonimsky I.B. Installation of the heat and nuclear power plant ventilation and air conditioning systems. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 133 p. (in Russian).
8. Novovoronezh NPP. AES-2006 design. Available at: http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed 26.10.2022) (in Russian).
9. Unit 1 ofNovovoronezh NPP II. Safety analysis report. Chapter 9 Unit2level auxiliary systems. OOO ATOMENERGOPROEKT Publ., 2016 (in Russian).
10. NPP22006. V2392M reactor facility. Upper unit. Thermal2hydraulic calculation. OKB GIDROPRESS Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
11. NPP22006. Novovoronezh NPP II. V2392M reactor facility. Thermal2hydraulic calculation. Part 46. Equipment heat losses. OKB GIDROPRESS Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
12. Samarsky A.A., Gulin A.V. Numerical methods. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1989, 432 p. (in Russian).
13. Denisikhina D.M. Use of the STAR2CCM+ program in the design of ventilation systems. Training guide. St. Petersburg. SPbGASU Publ., 2013, 68 p. (in Russian).
14. Bystrov Yu.A., Isaev S. ., Kudryavtsev N.A., Leontyev A.I. Numerical simulation of the heat transfer vortex intensification in tube banks. St. Petersburg. Sudostroyeniye Publ., 2005, 392 p. (in Russian).
15. Patankar S. Numerical methods for solving problems of heat transfer and fluid dynamics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 124 p. (in Russian).
16. Peire R., Taylor T. D. Computational methods in problems of mechanics. St. Petersburg. Hydrometeoizdat Publ., 1986, 351 p. (in Russian).
17. Fletcher K. Computational methods in fluid dynamics. Vol. II. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1991, 552 p. (in Russian).
18. Kirillov P.L., Yuryev Yu.S., Bobkov V.P. Handbook of thermal2hydraulic calculations (nuclear reactors, heat exchangers, steam generators). Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 296 p. (in Russian).
19. Lapin Yu.V., Strelets M.Kh. Internal flows of gas mixtures. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1989, 366 p. (in Russian).
20. Chui E. H., Raithby G. D. Computation of Radiant Heat Transfer on a Non-Orthogonal Mesh Using the Finite-Volume Method. Numerical Heat Transfer. 1993, v. 23, iss. 3, pp. 269-288. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/10407799308914901.
21. Ferziger J. H., Peric M. Computational method for fluid dynamics. Berlin. Heidelberg Publ., 1999, 389 p.