+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/04.pdf"
first_page="49"
last_page="60"
udc="621.039.5:532"
title="Numerical Simulation of Fluid Dynamics and Mixing in Headers of Sodium-Air Heat Exchangers"
original_title="Численное моделирование гидродинамики и перемешивания в коллекторах теплообменников натрий-воздух"
authors=["SmetaninTR", "PakholkovVV", "RogozhkinSA", "ShepelevSF"]
tags=["BN reactors", "AHX", "sodium", "mixingCFD", "hydrodynamics", "unevenness", "leaks", "pulsations"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.04"

+++

The paper presents the results of a numerical simulation for sodium fluid dynamics and mixing in the tubing system of an air-cooled heat exchanger (AHX), which is a part of the emergency cooldown system (ECS) of sodium fast reactors (SFRs). Non-uniform sodium flows in the AHX tubing system may lead to the mixing of different-temperature sodium flows, temperature fluctuations and tube breaks. It was found in the course of investigating accidents involving breaks in the PFR and Phenix reactor AHX tubing systems that the failure was caused by the metal temperature fluctuations [1].

The numerical simulation used three- and one-dimensional computer codes. It has been found that the calculations of the AHX sodium flow rate distribution with a practically acceptable accuracy can be performed using a one-dimensional code. The factors that influence the non-uniform distribution of sodium flows in the AHX tubing system have been analyzed. Calculations have been performed for the AHX sodium flow distributions and for the mixing of different-temperature sodium flows in the AHX outlet header. The results are presented from calculating the amplitude of sodium fluctuations near the AHX header walls. The effect from shutting down several modules on the non-uniform flow distribution and temperature fluctuations in the AHX has been investigated. Approximations of numerical solutions have been obtained for the sodium flow distribution as a function of the number of the modules shut down.

### References

1. Cruickshank A., Judd. A.M. Problems experienced during operation of the prototype fast reactor, Dounreay 1974-1994. Proceeding of a technical committee meeting. Reproduced by IAEA 2005, pp. 51-79.
2. Kolesnichenko I.V., Khalilov R.I., Shestakov A.V., Krylov A.N., Pakholkov V.V., Pavlinov A.M., Mamykin A.D., Vasilyev A.Yu., Rogozhkin S.A., Frik P.G. Mixing of different-temperature liquid sodium flows in the piping downstream of the T-joint. Teploenergetika (to appear).
3. Kolomiyets D.О., Levchenko Yu.D., Sorokin А.P. An experimental study into the hydraulic resistance of the finned tube assembly in fast reactor air-cooled heat exchangers. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 1, pp. 172-182; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.1.13 (in Russian).
4. Mochizuki H., Takano M.Heat transfer in heat exchangers of sodium cooled fast reactors systems. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2009, no. 239, pp.295-307; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2008.10.013
5. FluidFlow. User Guide. Available at: https://support.fluidflowinfo.com (accessed Oct. 24, 2021).
6. Aksenov A.A., Zhluktov S.V., Osipov S.L., Rogozhkin S.A., Sazonova M.L., Fadeev I.D., Shepelev S.F., Shmelev V.V. Development and verification of a turbulent heat transport model for sodium-based liquid metal coolants. Vychislitelnaya mekhanika sploshnykh sred. 2014, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 306-316; DOI: https://doi.org/10.7242/1999-6691/2014.7.3.30 (in Russian).
7. Knebel J.U., Krebs L., Muller U., Axcell B.P. Experimental investigation of a confined heated sodium jet in a co-flow. J. Fluid Mech. 1998, no. 368. pp. 51–79; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112098001463
8. Kimura N., Miyakoshi H., Kamide H. Experimental investigation on transfer characteristics of temperature fluctuation from liquid sodium to wall in parallel triple-jet. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer. 2007, no. 50. pp. 2024-2036; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2006.09.030
9. Idelchik I.Ye. Handbook of Hydraulic Resistances. Moscow. Mashinostroyeniye Publ., 1992, 672 p. (in Russian).