+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/05.pdf"
first_page="61"
last_page="72"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Towards a Uniform Description of Recombiners Performance by a Consistent CFD approach with the use of a Detailed Mechanism of Hydrogen Oxidation"
original_title="К единообразному CFD+описанию работоспособности рекомбинаторов с учетом детального механизма реакции окисления водорода"
authors=["AvdeenkovAV", "AchakovskyOI", "KetlerovVV", "SolovievSL", "DuongQuangHuong"]
tags=["recombinator", "productivity", "chemical kinetics", "ignition", "multi-step reaction"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.05"

+++

For a consistent CFD substantiation of the recombiner performance, a detailed mechanism of hydrogen and oxygen recombination is used. The detailed mechanism of chemical kinetics (multi-step recombination reaction) makes it possible to claim universality, both in the numerical justification of the recombiner performance and in the justification of the flameless recombination threshold and makes it possible to justify the method for optimizing the recombiner to improve its characteristics. The models developed based on this approach were applied to both flat and cylindrical catalytic elements, which are used in FR and RVK recombiners, respectively. As part of the numerical studies, the detailed recombination mechanism was verified, namely the temperature distribution along the catalytic elements was compared and the performance of catalytic elements was compared as well. Good agreement was obtained between the calculated and experimental data. The approach considers not only the mechanism of surface recombination of hydrogen and oxygen on platinum, but also the mechanism of recombination in the gas phase. This makes it possible to calculate the onset of intense combustion outside the catalytic plates, which is a sign of volumetric ignition of the hydrogen-air environment. The concentrations at which such ignition is possible were obtained at different contents of water vapor in the medium. Thus, the proposed approach and the created models make it possible to fully describe the performance of recombiners of various designs without the use of additional experimental data, which is extremely necessary when justifying the hydrogen explosion safety of nuclear power plants.

### References

1. IAEA-TECDOC-1661. Mitigation of Hydrogen Hazards in Severe Accidents in Nuclear Power Plants. IAEA, Vienna, 2011.
2. Reinecke E.A., Bentaib A., Kelm S., Jahn W., Meynet N., Caroli C. Open Issues in the Applicability of Recombiner Experiments and Modelling to Reactor Simulations. Prog. Nucl. Energ., 2010, 52(1), pp. 136-147. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2009.09.010
3. Avdeenkov A.V., Sergeev V.V., Stepanov A.V., Malakhov A.A., Koshmanov D.Y., Soloviev S.L., Bessarabov D.G. Math Hydrogen Catalytic Recombiner: Engineering Model for Dynamic Full-Scale Calculations. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(52), pp. 23523-23537. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2018.10.212
4. IAEA International Nuclear Information System (INIS). Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/33/020/33020098.pdf (accesed May 20, 2023)
5. Framatome GmbH. Available at: https://www.framatome.com/solutions-portfolio/portfolio/product?product=A0640 (accesed May 20, 2023).
6. LLC ISPC «Russian Energy Technology». Available at: https://retech.ru/pkrv (accesed May 20, 2023).
7. Tarasov O.V., Kiselev A.E., Filippov A.S., Yudina T.A., Grigoruk D.G., Koshmanov D.E., Keller V.D., Khristenko E.B. Development and Verification of a Model of RVK-500, -1000 Recombiners for Modeling the Containment Shells of NPP with VVER by Computational Hydrodynamics. Atomic Energy, 2017, 121(3), pp. 131-136.
8. Avdeenkov A.V., Kalyakin S.G., Soloviev S.L., Duong Quang H. On the scalability of the operating capacity of hydrogen recombiners. Nuclear Energy and Technology, 2022, 8(2), pp. 143-152.
9. Bachellerie E., Arnould F., Auglaire M., de Boeck B., Braillard O., Eckardt B., Ferroni F., Moffett R. Generic approach for designing and implementing a passive autocatalytic recombiner PAR-system in nuclear power plant containments. Nucl. Eng. Des., 2003, 221, pp. 151-165. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0029-5493(02)00330-8
10. Reinecke E.A., Boehm J., Drinovac P., Struth S., Tragsdorf I.M. Modelling of catalytic recombiners: Comparison of REKO-DIREKT calculations with REKO-3 experiments, Proceedings of the International Conference «Nuclear Energy for New Europe 2005». Bled, Slovenia, September 5-8, 2005, 092.1-092.10.
11. Malakhov A.A., du Toit M.H., du Preez S.P., Avdeenkov A.V., Bessarabov D.G. Temperature Profile Mapping Over a Catalytic Unit of a Hydrogen Passive Autocatalytic Recombiner: Experimental and CFD study. Energy Fuels, 2020, 34(9), pp. 11637-11649. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c01582
12. Siemens STAR CCM+ CFD software. Available at: https://plm.sw.siemens.com/en-US/simcenter/fluids-thermal-simulation/star-ccm/ (accesed May 20, 2023).
13. Reinecke E.A., Kelm S., Jahn. W., Jдkel C., Allelein H.J. Simulation of the Efficiency of Hydrogen Recombiners as Safety Devices. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38(19), pp. 8117-8124. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.09.093
14. Baggemann J., Jahn W., Kelm S., Reinecke E.A., Allelein H.J. Numerical Study on the Influence of Different Boundary Conditions on the Efficiency of Hydrogen Recombiners inside a Car Garage. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(11), pp. 7608-7616. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.04.084
15. Appel C., Mantzaras J., Schaeren R., Bombach R., Inauen A., Kaeppeli B., Hemmerling B., Stampanoni A. An Experimental and Numerical Investigation of Homogeneous Ignition in Catalytically Stabilized Combustion of Hydrogen/Air Mixtures over Platinum, Combust. Flame, 2002, 28(4), pp. 340-368. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-2180(01)00363-7
16. Chemical-Kinetic Mechanisms for Combustion Applications, San Diego Mechanism, Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering (Combustion Research), University of California at San Diego. Available at: https://web.eng.ucsd.edu/mae/groups/combustion/mechanism.html (accesed May 20, 2023).
17. Meynet N., Bentaib A. Numerical Study of Hydrogen Ignition by Passive Autocatalytic Recombiners. Nuclear Technology, 2012, 178(1), pp. 17-28. DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT12-A13544