+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/06.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="85"
udc="621.039.553.3"
title="Regular Thermal Mode Method to Determine the Heat Release in the Structural Materials of the IR+8 Reactor Reflector"
original_title="Использование метода регулярного теплового режима для определения тепловыделения в конструкционных материалах отражателя реактора ИР-8"
authors=["ArefinkinaSE", "AbramovAN", "BabenkoAV", "ErakDYu", "EfremovPK", "MikhinOV", "YakovlevVV"]
tags=["regular thermal mode", "energy release determination", "instrumentation by thermocouples", "structural materials", "fuel rods samples", "ampoule device", "research reactor"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.06"

+++

The non-stationary method of regular thermal regime is considered as an approach to determine the value of heat release in structural materials samples. We present the derivation of a working equation that can be used to promptly find the average heat release when thermocouple is located at the «critical» radius of cylindrical sample.

The data received by the proposed method of determining the heat release in stainless steel and titanium samples that were irradiated in the third reflector row of the IR-8 reactor of NRC «Kurchatov Institute» are presented. The experimental device and cylindrical samples were instrumented by thermocouples. A good agreement of the results with the data from other computational approaches for determining the heat release in the samples is shown.

The proposed method of on-line experimental determination of heat release can be applied when conducting various reactor experiments. The possibility of using this method to monitor the parameters of experimental fuel rod samples or fuel rod simulators while they are irradiated in the ampoule device has been considered. In case of a tungsten-core fuel rod simulator, the choice of thermocouple location should be made with regard to the position of its «critical» point in the cylinder, where the unsteady thermal process takes place only in a regular form. These data can be used both for express control of irradiation parameters during experiment as well as for verification of calculation models which describe the specimens behavior during their testing in ampoule devices.

### References

1. Kokorev L.S., Haritonov V.V. Thermohydraulic calculations and optimization of nuclear installations: Textbook. A manual for universities (ed. V.I. Subbotin). Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 248 p. (in Russian).
2. Kondrat’ev G.M. Regular thermal mode. Moscow, GITTL Publ., 1954, 408 p. (in Russian).
3. Yaryshev N.A. Theoretical foundations for measuring non-stationary temperature. Leningrad, USSR. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990, 255 p. (in Russian).
4. Kondrat’ev G.M., Dul’nev G.N., Platunov E.S., Yaryshev N.A. Applied physics: Heat transfer in instrument making. SPb. SPbGU ITMO Publ., 2003, 560 p. (in Russian).
5. Erak D.Yu., Yakovlev V.V., Murashov V.N., Nasonov V.A., Buslaev V.S., Mozhaev A.A., Mikhin O.V., Nichiporenko Yu.B. Development of technology for accelerated radiation testing of structural materials using a unique installation – the IR-8 reactor. Preprint IAJe-6648/4. Moscow, NITs «KI» Publ., 2010, 29 p. (in Russian).
6. Murashov V.N., Kokorev L.S., Yakovlev V.V. Experimental-computational study of temperature in the center of fuel rods with fuel from uranium dioxide. Preprint IAJe-2936, Moscow. NITs «KI» Publ., 1978, 23 p. (in Russian).
7. Yakovlev V.V., Erak D.Yu., Abramov A.N., Buslaev V.S., Kochkin V.N., Mikhin O.V., Mozhaev A.A., Murashov V.N., Nasonov V.A., Nichiporenko Yu.B., Pesnya Yu.E., Khmyzov N.V., Yashin A.F. Techniques and methods for testing structural materials at the IR-8 research reactor. VANT. Fizika yadernykh reaktorov. 2017, iss. 3, pp. 58-64 (in Russian).
8. Yakovlev V.V., Erak D.Yu., Goncharov L.A., Kiselev Aleksei S., Kruglikov A.E., Mikhin O.V., Nasonov V.A., Pesnya Yu.E., Sedov AA., Khmyzov N.V., Chabak A.F., Yashin A.F. Techniques and methods of research in the IR-8 reactor of experimental fuel rods with different fuel compositions. VANT. Fizika yadernykh reaktorov. 2017, iss. 3, pp. 49-57 (in Russian).
9. Lysikov B.V., Prozorov V.K. Thermometry and flow metering of nuclear reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1985. 120 p. (in Russian).
10. Samoilov A.G., Volkov V.S., Solonin M.I. Fuel elements of nuclear reactors: Textbook for universities. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1996. 400 p. (in Russian).
11. Emel’yanov I.Ya., Mikhan V.I., Solonin V.I. Design of nuclear reactors: Textbook. manual for universities under general. ed. acad. N.A. Dollezhall. Moscow, Energoizdat Publ., 1982. 400 p. (in Russian).
12. Sulaberidze V.Sh. Means for monitoring testing conditions for materials and nuclear equipment products in research reactors. Dr. Eng. Diss. Dimitrovgrad. GNTs NIIAR Publ., 1999 (in Russian).
13. Usachev V.B., Zajcev P.A., Mel’nikov G.N., Prijmak S.V. Influence of operational factors on
thermal inertia of thermocouples in coolant thermal control channels at the outlet from power generating units of atomic power plants with PWR reactors. Proceedings of the 8th International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety assurance of NPP with VVER». Podol’sk, Russia. OKB «GIDROPRESS», 2013 (in Russian).
14. Markina N.V., Tsykanov V.A. Temperature measurement in high-flux reactors using thermocouples. Atomic energy. 1974, vol. 36, iss. 1, pp. 84-86. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01123116
15. Trofimchuk V.V., Nasonov V.A., Erak D.Yu., Pesnja Yu.E., Kruglikov A.E., Mihin O.V. Determination of the energy release from gamma radiation in the experimental channels of the IR-8 reactor. VANT. Fizika jadernyh reaktorov. 2022, iss. 5, pp. 20-29 (in Russian).
16. Lykov A.V., Cherkesov G.N., Vol’f Je., Breus S.N., Golovashkin A.A., Shubin A.A., Motulevich G.P., Dzhenkins T., Dzhouns P., Kingsli-H’juz Je., Kingsli-H’juz K., Makkuin K., Mor S. Theory of thermal conductivity. Moscow. High School Publ., 1967, 599 p. (in Russian).
17. Galin N.M. Kirillov P.L. Heat and mass transfer in nuclear power. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 375 p. (in Russian).
18. Petuhov B.S., Genin L.G., Kovalev S.A. Heat transfer in nuclear power plants. Moscow. USSR. Atomizdat Publ., 1974, 408 p. (in Russian).
19. Chirkin V.S. Thermophysical properties of nuclear engineering materials. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1986, 484 p. (in Russian).
20. Abramov A.N., Arefinkina S.E., Gerstle A.D., Efremov P.K., Mihin O.V., Murashov V.N. Simulation of PID-Controller Parameters of a Heater in an Ampoule Reactor Experiment. Abstracts proceedings of the XVII Kurchatov youth scientific school. Moscow. 2023, 269 p. (in Russian).