+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/07.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="85"
udc="621.039.75+621.039.58"
title="Main Provisions of the Block Concept of Decommissioning of NPP Buildings and Facilities"
original_title="Основные положения блоковой концепции вывода из эксплуатации зданий и сооружений АЭС"
authors=["EngovatovIA", "IvanovaAI", "KovalenkoZhA", "VolkovVG", "SafronovaNN"]
tags=["NPP unit", "immediate dismantling", "radioactive wastes", "block concept decommissioning NPP unit", "nuclear reactor", "buildings and constructions and site NPP unit"]
rubric = "decommissioning"
rubric_name = "Decommissioning"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.07"

+++

Recently, a growing number of countries have adopted the «immediate decommissioning» strategy as the main option for decommissioning nuclear power plants. In Russia, in 2017, based on the results of a feasibility study for units No. 1 and No. 2 of the Novovoronezh NPP, an immediate dismantling strategy was also adopted. The main advantages of this option for NPP decommissioning are the reduction in the cost of work, the reduction in the time of work, the possibility of using the existing plant personnel and site infrastructure.

As the main provisions for the implementation of this strategy, the authors previously considered and proposed an algorithm for performing the organizational and technological sequence of NPP decommissioning works, which represent an enlarged sequence of the main decommissioning stages and require further detailing.

As a follow-up to the proposed sequential stages of decommissioning work, it is necessary to develop a single descriptive document detailing the decommissioning processes.

The main provisions of the block concept were developed on the basis of the currently valid concept for the decommissioning of nuclear installations, radiation sources and storage facilities of the State Corporation Rosatom, the Concept for the preparation and decommissioning of nuclear power plant units of Rosenergoatom Concern JSC, federal norms and regulations (NP- 001-15). Its purpose is to develop and specify the provisions of the basic concept in relation to one of the specific decommissioning objects – buildings, structures and nuclear power plant sites, as important potential sources of radiation and environmental hazards.
 
The organizational and technological components of these concepts, the main problematic issues oиwhich make it possible to form organizational and technological processes for decommissioning NPP that are unified for understanding

### References

1. Tsebakovskaia N.S., UtkinS.S., IvanovA.Y., SaharovV.K., PoluninK.E. Luchshie zarubezhnye praktiki vyvoda iz ekspluatatsii yadernykh ustanovok i reabilitatsii zagriaznennykh territorii. Vol. 1. – Moscow. Comtechprint, 2017. 336 p. ISBN 9907220-4-978-5-0 (in Russian).
2. Tsebakovskaia N.S., Utkin S.S., Ivanov A.Y., Saharov V.K., Polunin K.E. Luchshie zarubezhnye praktiki vyvoda iz ekspluatatsii yadernykh ustanovok i reabilitatsii zagriaznennykh territorii. Vol. 2. – Moscow. Comtechprint, 2017. 187 p. ISBN 9907220-4-978-5-0 (in Russian).
3. Krupysheva P.O. Sravnitelnaia otsenka protsessov vyvoda iz ekspluatatsii AES: Ispaniia VS Germaniia. Innovatsii. Nauka. Obrazovanie. 2021, no. 34, pp. 2471-2477 (in Russian).
4. Muratov O.E., Tikhonov M.N. Snyatie atomnykh elektrostantsi is ekspluatatsii: problemy i puti resheniia. ANRI. 2008, no.1(52), pp. 2-15 (in Russian).
5. Bylkin B.K., Zverkov Y.A., Engovatov I.A., Zimin V.K., Korneev I.I, Safronova N.N., Volkov V.G., Stakhiv M.P., Nemytov C.A., Chukin A.P. Osnovy vyvoda iz ekspluatatsii blokov atomnykh elektricheskikh stantsii. M., Izdatelskii dom MEI, 2019, 503 p. ISBN 978-5-383-01384-4 (in Russian).
6. Engovatov I.A., Kovalenko Z.A. Algorithm for constructing an organizational and technological model for dismantling NPP buildings. E3S Web of Conferences, 263, 04044 (2021), 2021. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202126304044
7. Engovatov I.A., Kovalenko Zh.A. Specifics of dismantling decommissioned buildings and structures at nuclear power plants. International research journal. 2020, no. 2(1), pp. 33-37. DOI: https://doi.org/10.23670/IRJ.2020.102.12.006 (in Russian).
8. Laraia М. Nuclear decommissioning: Planning, execution and international experience. Woodhead Publishing Limited. 2012, 805 p. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/295564309_Nuclear_decommissioning_Planning_execution_and_international_experience (accessed Jan. 10, 2023).
9. Larsson H., Anunti A., Edelborg M. Decommissioning Study of Oskarshamn NPP. R-13-04. – Westinghouse Electric Sweden AB, 2013. 196 p. Available at:https://skb.se/upload/publications/pdf/R-13-04.pdf (accessed Jan. 10, 2023).
10. Bolshov L.A., Laverov N.P., Linge I.I. Problemy iadernogo naslediia i puti ikh resheniia. Vyvod iz ekspluatatsii. Vol. 3. Moskva, 2015. 316 p. (in Russian).
11. Zverkov Y.A., Ivanov O.P., Koliadin V.I., Lemus A.V., Pavlenko V.I., Stepanov V.E., Fadin S.Y., Shisha A.D. Analiz problem podgotovki i vyvoda iz ekspluatatsii rossiiskikh issledovatelskikh reaktorov. M.: NITS «Kurchatovskii institut», 2019 (in Russian).
12. Engovatov I.A., Siniushin D.K. Minimizatsiia radioaktivnykh otkhodov pri vyvode iz ekspluatatsii atomnykh stantsii novykh pokolenii. Vestnik Belgorodskogo gosudarstvennogo tekhnologicheskogo universiteta im.V.G. Shukhova. 2017, no. 10, pp. 46-49 (in Russian).
13. Bylkin B.K., Engovatov I.A., Kozhevnikov A.N., Siniushin D.K. Navedennaia aktivnost radiatsionnoi zashchity v probleme vyvoda iz ekspluatatsii iadernykh ustanovok. Iadernaia i radiatsionnaia bezopasnost. 2017, no. 3(85), pp. 1-14 (in Russian).
14. Bylkin B.K., Gorelov K.A., Engovatov I.A., Zaytsev A.N., Zimin V.K., Rubtsov P.M., Tihanovskyi S.A. Neobhodimost’ peresmotra normativnoj bazy po vyvodu iz ekspluatacii AES. Bezopasnost’ yadernyh tehnologij i okrutsauchej sredy. 2013, no . 1, pp. 34-41 (in Russian).
15. Engovatov I., Kovalenko Z., Mokhov G. Proektirovanie universalnogo kompleksa po utilizatsii na ploshchadkakh deistvuiushchikh AES. Energeticheskaia politika. 2022, no. 3(169), pp. 76-85 (in Russian).