+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/08.pdf"
first_page="95"
last_page="110"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Ensuring Radiation Safety During Dismantling, Transportation and Long-Term Storage of the SM-3 Research Reactor Cor"
original_title="Обеспечение радиационной безопасности при проведении работ по демонтажу, транспортированию, размещению на долговременное хранение центральной зоны исследовательской ядерной установки СМ+3"
authors=["YusupovAN", "MikhailovPA", "KizinVD", "GromovMO", "KusovnikovAV", "AvdoninVV"]
tags=["SM-3 research reactor", "reactor core", "equivalent dose rate", "effective dose rate", "induced activity"]
rubric = "decommissioning"
rubric_name = "Decommissioning"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.08"

+++

Described shortly here is a procedure of demounting, removal, transport and long-term storage of the SM-3 core, based on the previous experience of reactor refurbishment undertaken in 1991. Prior to performing refurbishment, computations and calculated data analysis were performed to prove radiation safety of this work, which included estimation of the activity level for activation products in the structural materials of the nuclear research reactor core and the radiation conditions at different stages of its handling. As evidenced by the calculated data, the activity of the main dose-forming radionuclide 60Co attains equilibrium in about 12 years of radiation exposure. Taking into account the fact that the time period between two refurbishments was longer than 12 years, the calculated values of the equivalent dose rate were normalized to the radiation monitoring data obtained during the previous refurbishment, taking into account the calculated activity of 60Co radionuclide. The normalization made it possible to confirm reliability of estimates. The obtained activity data of activation products and taking into account the time spent during the SM-3 refurbishment in 1991, the radiation impact on personnel was estimated. Calculated values of the anticipated effective radiation exposure doses to the personnel engaged in the refurbishment revealed that the main limits of the personnel radiation exposure established in accordance with NRB-99/2009 were not exceeded.

Comparison of the results of calculating the equivalent dose rate with the results of radiation monitoring at various points allowed us to establish that during the calculation and analytical justification of the radiation safety of work, the assessment of reflected radiation was significantly underestimated. But the radiation monitoring data, personal radiation monitoring, as well as recorded data of automatic radiation monitoring system show that all work was performed in compliance with the requirements of regulatory documents in the field of radiation safety.

### References

1. NRB-99/2009 Radiation safety standards. Moscow. Federalnyy tsentr gigiyeny i epidemiologii Rospotrebnadzora, 2009. 100 p. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293828/4293828132.htm (accessed August 23, 2023) (In Russian).
2. OSPORB-99/2010. Basic sanitary rules for ensuring radiation safety. Moscow. Federalnyy tsentr gigiyeny i epidemiologii Rospotrebnadzora, 2010. 83 p. 100 p. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293816/4293816468.htm (accessed August 23, 2023) (In Russian).
3. Gusev N.G., Kovalev E.E., Mashkovich V.P., Suvorov A.P. Radiation protection of nuclear engineering installations. Ed. 3. Moscow. Energoatomizdat, 1990, 352 p. ISBN 5-283-03059-8 (In Russian).
4. GOST 5632-2014. Stainless steels and corrosion resisting, heat-resisting and creep resisting alloys. Grades. Moscow. Standartinform, 2015. 52 p. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293768/4293768317.htm (accessed August 23, 2023) (In Russian).
5. Romanov E.G. Computer-aided simulation of nuclei transmutation chains under neutron irradiation. Collected papers JSC «SSC RIAR». 2018, Iss. 1, pp. 3-13.