+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/11.pdf"
first_page="134"
last_page="139"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Semi-empirical Relations for Calculation of Density, Dynamic Viscosity and Specific Heat Capacity of Liquid Potassium"
original_title="Полуэмпирические соотношения для расчета плотности, динамической вязкости и удельной теплоемкости жидкого калия"
authors=["BabayevaYuA"]
tags=["potassium", "coolant", "density", "dynamic viscosity", "heat capacity", "thermodynamic properties"]
rubric = "letters"
rubric_name = "Letters ti the editorial office"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.11"

+++

This paper presents the results of analysis of experimental data on the density, dynamic viscosity and specific heat capacity of potassium in the liquid phase. Publications from the open literature from 1954 to the present time have been reviewed and analyzed. Further, calculated relations for evaluation of thermodynamic properties are proposed, error values of the proposed relations and the range of their applicability are given. The results given in 30 experimental and computational papers are used in the analysis. The obtained relations can be used as recommended for calculation of thermodynamic properties of light liquid-metal coolants.

### References

1. Handbook of thermohydraulic calculations in nuclear power engineering. Edit. by P.L. Kirillov, in 3 vol., Moscow: Izdat, 2014, 686 p. (In Russian).
2. Thermophysical properties of nuclear engineering materials. Edit. by P.L. Kirillov. M.: Izdat., 194 p. (In Russian).
3. Handbook on the properties of materials for advanced reactor technologies. Edited by V.M. Poplavsky. M.: Izdat, 2011, 392 p. (In Russian).
4. Drits M.E., Budberg P.B., Burkhanov G.S., Drits A.M., Panovko V.M., Properties of elements. Handbook. M: Metallurgiya, 1985, 672 p. (In Russian).
5. Chirkin V.S., Thermophysical properties of nuclear engineering materials. Handbook. M.: Atomizdat, 1968, 484 p. (In Russian).
6. Gryaznov G.M., Evtikhin V.A., Lublinsky I.E. et al. Materials science of liquid metal systems of thermonuclear reactors. M.: Energoatomizdat, 1989, 240 p. (In Russian).
7. Ivanovsky M.N., Sorokin V.P., Yagodkin I.V. Physical foundations of heat pipes. M.: Atomizdat, 1978, 256 p. (In Russian).
8. Chusov I.A., Novikov G.E., Obysov N.A., Pronyaev V.G. Calculation relations for determining the thermodynamic properties of a lead coolant. VANT. Ser.: Fizika yadernyh reaktorov. 2019, iss. 2, pp. 83–91 (In Russian).
9. Madsen K., Nielsen H.B., Tingleff O. Methods for Non-Linear Least Squares Problems. Technical University of Denmark, 2nd Edition, 2004, 30 p.
10. Hudson D. Statistics for physicists. M.: Mir, 1979. 293 p. (In Russian).
11. Vandevender W.H., Haskell K.H. The SLATEC mathematical subroutine library. Signum Newsletter, 1982, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 16-21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/1057594.1057595
12. Been S.A., Edwards H.S., Teeter C.E., Calkins V.P. The Densities of Liquids at Elevated Temperatures. I. The Densities of Lead, Bismuth, Lead-Bismuth Eutectic and Lithium in the Range from Melting Point to 1000 ЪC (1832 F). NEPA Report 1585 (Oak Ridge, TN: Fairchild Engine and Airplane Corp.), 1950, 26 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2172/12732258
13. Miller R.R. Physical Properties of Liquid Metals, in: Liquid Metals Handbook, 2nd Ed., Report NAVEXOS P-733. Atomic Energy Commission and Dept. of the Navy, Washington, USA, 1954.
14. Wilson J.R. The Structure of Liquid Metals and Alloys. J. Met. Rev., 1965, vol. 10, pp. 381-590. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1179/095066065790138401
15. Andrade E.N. da C., Dobbs E.R. The Viscosities of Liquid Lithium, Rubidium and Caesium. Proc. Roy. SOC., ser. A, vol. 211, no. 1104, 1952, pp. 12–30. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1952.0022
16. Nikolsky N.A., Kalakutskaya N.A., Pchelkin I.M., Klassen T.V., Veltischeva V.A. Thermophysical properties of molten metals. Teploenergetika, 1959, no. 2, pp. 92–95. (In Russian).
17. Shpilrain E.E., Soldatenko Yu.A., Yakimovich K.A., Fomin V.A., Savchenko V.A., Belova A.M., Kagan D.N., Krainova I.F. Experimental study of thermophysical and electrophysical properties of liquid alkali metals at high temperatures. Teplofizika vysokih temperature, 1965, vol. 3, iss. 6, pp. 930–933. (In Russian).
18. Vargaftik N.B. Handbook of thermophysical properties of gases and liquids. 2nd ed. M.: Nauka, 1972, 720 p. (In Russian).
19. Tepper F., Zelenak J., Rochlich F., May V. Thermophysical and Transport Properties of Liquid Metals. M.S.A. Res. Corp., Callery, Pa., 1965, 25p.
20. Goltsova E. I. Density of lithium, sodium and potassium up to 1500-1600C. Teplofizika vysokih temperature, 1966, vol.4., iss. 3, pp. 360-363. (In Russian).
21. Christensen N.E., Feurbacher B. Volume and surface photoemission from tungsten. I. Calculation of band structure and emission spectra. J. Phys. Rev. B, 1974, vol. 10, no 6, pp. 2349-2361. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.10.2349
22. Dickerson R., Gray G., Hayt J. The basic laws of chemistry. M.: Mir, 1982, vol. 1. 652 p.
23. Mozgovoj A.G., Novikov I.I., Pokrasin M.A., Roshchupkin V.V., Teryaev V.V. Pressure of saturated alkali metal vapors. Reviews on the thermophysical properties of substances. 1985, no 1(51), pp. 3-108. (In Russian).
24. Nuclear reactors. II. Technique of nuclear reactors. Materials of the US Atomic Energy Commission (Transl. From English). M.: IL, 1957, 782 p. (In Russian).
25. Shpilrain E.E., Yakimovich K.A., Totsky E.E., Timrot D.P., Fomin V.A. Thermophysical properties of alkali metals. M.: Moscow, 1970, 487 p. (In Russian).
26. Shpilrain E.E., Yakimovich K.A., Skovorodko S.N., Mozgovoj A.G. Teplofizicheskie svojstva shchelochnyh metallov. Obzory po teplofizicheskim svojstvam veshchestv. 1983, no. 6(44), pp. 1-92 (In Russian).
27. Kirillov P.L., Deniskina N.B. Thermophysical properties of liquid metal heat carriers (reference tables and ratios). Review. FEI-0291. CNIIatominform, 2000, 41 p. (In Russian).
28. Handbook of Rare Metals (Edit. Plushev V.M.). M.: Mir, 1965, pp. 343–383 (In Russian).
29. Landolt P.E., Sittig M. Lithium. In: Rare Metals Handbook, 2nd ed., New York, NY: Reinhold, 1961, pp. 239-252.
30. Metals Reference Book. 5th Edition (Ed.: Colin J. Smithells). Butterworth-Heinemann, 1976, 1582 p. ISBN: 9781483192529.