+++

categories="article"
date="2023-12-16T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2023-04"
issue_name="2023 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/04/12.pdf"
first_page="140"
last_page="143"
udc="621.039.58"
title="Selection of Void Fraction Correlations for Task of Fuel Assemblies Cooling in SFP"
original_title="Выбор корреляций для расчета истинного объемного паросодержания при решении задачи охлаждения ТВС в бассейне выдержки"
authors=["SledkovRM"]
tags=["spent fuel pool", "void fraction", "time of start of fuel uncovering", "code ROK/B", "cooling loss", "experimental facility", "FA"]
rubric = "letters"
rubric_name = "Letters ti the editorial office"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.4.12"

+++

The task of hydrodynamics and heat and mass transfer in VVER spent fuel pool (SFP) during accident with loss of SFP cooling was considered. On the base of comparison of the local (OKB GIDROPRESS test facility, 1993 year) and integral (ALADIN test facility, 2016 year) experiments results and calculation results (using existing steam-water mixture void fraction correlations), the most suitable correlations were selected. 16 correlations were analyzed. Analysis shows, that 2 correlations are the most suitable for SFP conditions. That is Avdeev A.A. and Stiricovich M.A. – Kutateladze S.S. correlations. Calculation was performed, using ROK/B code.

### References

1. Sledkov R.M., Galkin I.Y, Stepanov O.E., Strebnev N.A. Determination of steam volume fraction in the event of loss of cooling of the spent fuel storage pool. Thermal Engineering. 2017, vol.64, no. 1, pp. 15-19. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S004036361610009X (in Russian).
2. Schulz S., Schuster C., Hurtado A. Experimental investigation of boil-off-scenario in BWR spent fuel pools. Proc. of the 21st International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE21). 2013, Chengdu, China. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/ICONE21-16830
3. Sledkov R.M., Kharnaukhov V.E., Stepanov O.E., Bedretdinov M.M., Chusov I.A. Results of validation and cross-verification of the ROK/B design code on the problem of loss of cooling in the spent fuel pool. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2021, no. 4, pp.85-98. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.08 (in Russian).
4. Kutateladze S.S., Stiricovich M.A. Hydrodynamics of fluid-gas systems. Moscow, Energy Publ., 1976, 296 p. (in Russian).
5. Avdeev A.A., Sirenco E.I. Void fraction at bubbling. Thermal Engineering. 1984, no. 11, pp. 43-46 (in Russian).