+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:23:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="01"
file="/pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="14"
udc="621.039.7"
title="Substantiation of boiling water reactors safety in case of large spills coolant"
original_title="Обоснование безопасности корпусного кипящего реактора при крупных течах контура теплоносителя"
authors=["KurskijAS"]
tags=["vessel-type boiling water reactor (BWR)", "radioactive corrosion products", "gaseous fission products", "radiation monitoring system", "radiolysis products", "explosive mixture"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.01"

+++

Experimental data of the prototype reactors radiation safety are needed for large-scale deployment of innovative power units at the present stage of nuclear industry. The article is devoted to the results description of radiolytic processes and radiation safety of the VK-50 reactor facility. VK-50 is the reactor with natural circulation of coolant.

The information was obtained by empirical research. Estimated studies of the reactors radiation safety are based on the results of pilot studies.

The article is devoted to the results description of radiation safety of the VK-50 reactor facility. VK-50 is the reactor with natural circulation of coolant. The article describes the features of the catalytic combustion systems in accidents. The feature of phase transfer radioactivity can limit the consequences of severe accidents on the boiling-water reactor.

The unprecedented method is developed for determining the radioactive situation in the emergency box. The technological scheme and the operating conditions prevent the emergencies with explosions in equipment and shut out the accident with outlet of radioactive substances into the environment. The feature of phase transfer radioactivity can limit the consequences of severe accidents with coolant leakage.

The obtained results can be applied to confirmation of safety and to enhancement BWR.

### References

1. Akio S. Next-Generation ABWR and Future Nuclear Power Plants / S.Akio, S.Shigeru, F.Toshihiro // Toshiba review, 2005, v. 60, no. 2, рр. 14-21.
2. Concept of a future High Pressure-Boiling Water Reactor (HP-BWR) // Frigyes Reisch Nuclear Power Safety, Department of Physics School of Engineering Sciences KTH, Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm, Sweden Seminar, 2007, v. 21, no. 6, рр. 2-4.
3. Sanitarnie normy i pravila «Normy radiacionnoj bezopasnosti-99» [Sanitary rules and norms] Rossijskaya gazeta, Sept. 11, 2009. (in Russian)
4. [Ibid, p.2.3]
5. [Ibid, p.3.1.6]
6. Kurskiy A.S., Tul’nikov D.F., Yakshin E.K., Kizin V.D. Sozdanie avtomatizirovannoy sistemy kontrolya vybrosov RV pri avariyakh na IYaU VK-50 [Development of automated control systems of radioactive releases during accidents on the VK-50]. Godovoy otchet (otchet ob osnovnykh issledovatel’skikh rabotakh, vypolnennykh v 2005 g.) [Annual report (report on the main research papers made in 2005)]. Dimitrovgrad, 2006, pp. 43–44. (in Russian)
7. Kurskij A.S., Eshcherkin V.M., Kalygin V.V., Semidotskiy S.S. Korpusnie kipyaschie rectory dlya atomnoy teplofikatsii [Boiling water vessel reactors for nuclear district heating]. Atomnaya Energiya. 2012, v. 111, no. 5, рр. 297-302.
8. Kurskij A.S., Kalygin V.V., Semidotskiy S.S. Perspektivy atomnoy teplofikatsii v Rossii [Prospects of nuclear district heating in Russia]. Teploenergetika. 2012, no. 5, рр. 3-9.