+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="/pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-02.pdf"
first_page="15"
last_page="26"
udc="621.039.526.034"
title="Accident analysis of reactor facility by using thermal hydraulic code KORSAR"
original_title="Расчетный анализ аварийных режимов реакторной установки с использованием теплогидравлического кода КОРСАР"
authors=["ParshikovIA", "SolovievDS", "SolovyevSV"]
tags=["accident", "modeling", "safety analysis", "thermal hydraulic code", "reactor facility"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.02"

+++

At realistic modeling in safety assessment, deterministic calculations for probabilistic safety analysis and for justify the accident instructions are widely used best estimate codes. Using American best estimate thermal hydraulic code RELAP5 for safety analysis of RBMK reactor facility leads to a number of negative consequences.

To provide a complete calculation design support of NPP project with RBMK reactor facility is necessary to use domestic codes. This paper proposes the most researched and verified best estimate thermal hydraulic code in Russia – the code KORSAR. To test the possibility of using the code KORSAR in the calculations RBMK reactor facilities in project TACIS R2.03/97 «Software Development for Accident Analysis of VVER and RBMK Reactors in Russia» was fulfilled a detailed calculation analysis of dynamic of the reactor facility in different accidents.

Result of this work is substantial upgrading of code KORSAR to enable the implementation of the safety analysis of the RBMK reactor facility. Received local and integral parameters indicate that the thermal hydraulic code KORSAR suitable for safety analysis of RBMK reactor facility.

### References

1. Dollezal’ N., Emel’yanov I. High Power Channel!type Reactor. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ. 1980. 208 p. (in Russian).
2. Kuzin A.V., Mironov Yu. V., Moscalyov A.M., Parshikov I.A., Soloviev S.L. Developing computational model RBMK by using code KORSAR. Abstracts of the Scientific and Technical Seminar «Evaluation of experimental data and verification of computer codes». Sosnovy Bor, 2004. (in Russian).