+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file="pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-03.pdf"
first_page="27"
last_page="34"
udc="621.039.564"
title="The development of multi-point acoustic probe diagnostics system of two-phase coolant"
original_title="Разработка многоточечной акустозондовой системы диагностики двухфазного теплоносителя"
authors=["Mel’nikovVI", "IvanovVV", "TeplyashinIA", "LoginovAV", "ShmelyovDI"]
tags=["multi-point acoustic probe", "two-phase flow", "volume gas content", "measurement system", "passive system of shut-down cooling of reactor"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.03"

+++

Air-water two phase flow diagnostics system based on acoustic sounding method has been developed for passive system of emergency cooling. The system make possible to study the real volumetric gas content distribution in the cross section of rectangular channel 100×100 mm at different angles of slope from vertical. Moreover, it is possible to estimate the flow dispersion, velocity of gas inclusions moving and flow conditions. The system consists of a movable 8-point probe which controlled remotely, electronic test unit in connection with computer for data processing.

The calibration of the measurement system by dilatometer method in vertical position of the channel was carried out. It has been shoran that the mean-square relative deviation of gas content from the standard values didn’t be over 2% in the range 0 – 12% of gas content.

The calculated evaluation of measured values of gas content in comparison with the known dependencies for drift-flux model.

### References

1. Mel’nikov V.I., Drobkov V.P., Kontelyov V.V. Akusticheskie metody diagnosiki gazozhidkostnyh potokov [Acoustic methods of diagnosis of gas-liquid flows]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 2006. 351 p. (in Russian)
2. Mel’nikov V. I., Khokhlov V.N., Ivanov V.V., Duncev A.V. Issledovanie akustichecoj provodimosti vodyanogo teplonositelya vysokih parametrov pri ego vskipanii [Investigation of acoustic conductivity water coolant of high parameters when boiling]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2006, no. 1, pp. 70–75.
3. Kataoka I, Ishii M. Drift Flux Model to Large Diameter Pipe and New Correlation for Pool Void Fraction. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer. 1987. 1927 p.
4. Labuncov D.A., Koryuhin I.P., Zaharova E.A. Parosoderzhanie dvuhfaznogo adiabatnogo potoka v vertical’nyh kanalah [Steam content of adiabatic two-phase flow in vertical channels]. Teploenergetica. 1968. 257 p.
5. Balunov B.F., Scheglov A.A., Il’in V.A., Sajkova E.N., Bol’shuhin M.A., Byh O.A., Hizbulin A.M., Sokolov A.N. Eksperimental’noe obosnovanie proekta sistemy avarijnogo rasholagivaniya reaktornoj ustanovki KLT-40S plavechej atomnoj teplofikacionnoj electrostancii [Experimental study for emergency cooling system KLT-40S floating nuclear cogeneration power station]. Teploenergetica. 2011, no. 5, pp. 55-60.