+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="04"
file="pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-04.pdf"
first_page="35"
last_page="42"
udc="539.213.2"
title="Synthesis of nanostructural materials from metal fusions and prospect of their use in various areas of science and technics"
original_title="Синтез наноструктурных материалов из металлических расплавов и перспективы их использования в различных областях науки и техники"
authors=["AskhadullinRS", "OsipovAA"]
tags=["аerogel", "nanostructures", "liquid metals", "gallium", "bismuth", "aluminium", "ceramics", "zirconium dioxide", "silicon nitride", "silicon carbide"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.04"

+++

This paper presents results of the synthesis technology of aluminum oxyhydroxides ultraporous Al2O3⋅n(H2O) (aerogel AlOOH) managed by the selective oxidation of binary liquid metal melt Ga-Al. The prospects of creating a liquid metal technology of nanomaterials synthesis of a wide range , which is managed by the selective oxidation of metal dissolved in an inert with respect to the oxidant used liquid metal media. The results of the impact of AlOOH aerogel on the properties of ceramic materials based on Si3N4, SiC, ZrO2.

### References

1. Askhadullin R.Sh., Osipov A.A. Liquid metal based technology of synthesis of nanostructured materials (by the example of oxides). These materials properties and applications areas. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 98 (2008) 072012.
2. Askhadullin R.Sh., Martynov P.N., Yudintsev P.А., Kurina I.S. Liquid metal based technology of synthesis of Al2O3⋅H2O aerogel and its application for receiving advanced ceramic materials. Journal for engineers: Nanothech 2005, no. 2, pp. 15 (in Russian)
3. Dmitriev V.V., Askhadullin R.Sh., Martynov P.N., Osipov A.A., Krasnikhin D.A., Senin A.A., Yudin A.N. Phase diagram of superfluid 3 He in “nematically order” aerogel. JETP Letters 2012., v. 95, iss. 6, pp. 355 - 360.