+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="05"
file="pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-05.pdf"
first_page="43"
last_page="50"
udc="539.1 + 621.039"
title="Study of influence of nanostructured aluminum oxide aero-gel on the crystallization process and structure of clamp material based on the magnesium oxide"
original_title="Исследования влияния наноструктурированного аэрогеля оксида алюминия на процессы кристаллизации и структурообразования материала-фиксатора на основе оксида магния"
authors=["SukhonosovVYa", "ChernovVA", "BogdanovNYu"]
tags=["crystallization", "clamp material", "magnesium oxide", "alumophosphate binding", "irradiated nuclear fuel", "nanostructured material", "aluminum oxide aero-gel"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.05"

+++

Clamp material based on the magnesium oxide is used to fill the annulus of irradiated fuel assemblies with a micro or macro cracks in shells. The aim of present work was consisted to study of influence of aluminum oxide aero-gel nanoparticls on the crystallization process and structure of clamp material.

The microstructure of clamp material modified aluminum oxide nanoparticles was studied with use of digital scanning electron microscope. It is presented pictures of the following structures: horizontal layered structure of the crystal, blocked microstructure of the sample covered spherical, fibrous, rectangular crystals and spherulite structure.

It is shown that the addition of aluminum oxide nanoparticles in small quantities equal to 0.01 and 0.06 wt.%, lead to significant changes in the microstructure of the samples. Found crystals composed of densely packed fused spherulites. The spherulites have a fine structure and are composed of single crystals of irregular shape and fibrous crystals. When you add in the number of nanoparticles 0.06 wt.%, except spherulites have the fused-packed plate-like crystals. Microstructure packed fused spherulites and rectangular crystals act as reinforcement of the samples.

Modifing of clamp material by nanoparticls of aluminum oxide permits to increase mechanical durability essentially.

### References

1. Sukhonosov V. Ya., Nikolaev A.N., Nikolaev S.A., Somov I.E., Sigeikin G.I., Sukhoverhova O.V., Prudnikov N.V., Chernov V.A. Magnesium-phosphate clamps for spentт nuclear fuel. Rossijskij Khimicheskij Zhurnal. 2010, v. 54, no. 3, pp. 89-93 (in Russian).
2. Sukhonosov V. Ya., Nikolaev A.N., Nikolaev S.A., Somov I.E., Sigeikin G.I., Sukhoverhova O.V., Prudnikov N.V., Chernov V.A. Kondicionirovanie negermetichnogo otrabotavshego topliva s pomoshyu magnijfosfatnogo kompaunda. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2010, no. 3, pp. 131-137.
3. Sukhonosov V. Ya., Chernov V.A., Bogdanov N.Yu. Issledovanie processov kristallizacii pri otverzhdenii materiala-fiksatora na osnove oksida magniya. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2012, no. 4, pp. 75-83.
4. Vernigorova V.N., Korolev E.V., Eremkin A.I. Cementnye komposity s nanorazmernymi gidrosilikatami kalcyya. Mezhdunarodnyj forum po nanotehnologiyam. Moscow, Rosnano Publ. 2008, v.1, p. 435. (In Russian).
5. Staroverov V.D. Struktura i svojstva nanomodificyrovannogo cementnogo kamnya. Autoreferat cand. tekhn. sci. diss. [Structure and properties of nanomodified concrete]. St.-Petersburg, 2009. 18 p. (in Russian).
6. Martynov P.N., Ashadulin R.Sh., Yudincev P.A., Simashov A.A., Chaban A.Yu., Osipov A.A. Phisiko-himicheskie osnovy sinteza materialov iz rasplavov Ga, Pb-Bi, Pb. Svojstva proproizvedennyh substancij i perspektivnye oblasti ih ispol’zovaniya. Mezhdunarodnyj forum po nanotehnologiyam. Moscow, Rosnano Publ. 2008, p.485. (in Russian).
7. Martynov P.N., Ashadulin R.Sh., Yudincev P.A. Strukturnye i morfologicheskie osobennosti ultraporistogo oksigidroksila alyuminiya (Al2O3. nH2O), ibid, p. 487. (in Russian).