+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="06"
file="pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-06.pdf"
first_page="51"
last_page="60"
udc="51.7:539.17"
title="Calculation of isotopic composition and induced activity of irradiated materials in innovative accelerator-driven systems"
original_title="Расчет изотопного состава и наведенной активности облученных материалов инновационных электроядерных установок"
authors=["KorovinYuA", "MaksimushkinaAV"]
tags=["transmutation", "activity calculation", "irradiated materials", "nuclear data", "reaction cross-sections", "neural networks"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.06"

+++

The paper describes the SNT.1 system for calculating the isotopic composition and induced activity of irradiated materials in innovative accelerator-driven systems (ADS). The SNT.1 algorithm, the list and format of the input data, the list of evaluated nuclear data libraries to be used in the calculations as well as various calculation options are given. The calculations performed by SNT.1 are presented. For the TRADE project, the activity calculation of the water cooling the Ta target is presented, the calculation results were compared with those obtained by other software codes. The results of activity calculations by different codes show good agreement. The concentration and activity of nuclides formedduring irradiation of the lead-bismuth target are performed with due account of the variationsin the accelerator current during irradiation. The possibility of using neural networks for approximation and recovery of data, such as the reaction cross-sections, is considered. RBF and GRNN neural network structures were selected to approximate data on the 209Bi (n, 3n) 207Bi and 54Fe (n, p) 54Mn reaction cross sections. Neural networks were used to restore the data on the total cross-section of the neutron-209Bi interaction reactions. The approximation quality was assessed using agreement factors. It was shown that it is possible to obtain the necessary data and produce further calculations without using complex software systems.

### References

1. House of lords select committee on science and technology, management of nuclear waste, session 1998-99 3rd report, 1999.
2. Physics and Safety of Transmutation Systems, A Status Report, NEA No. 6090, OECD 2006.
3. Kazanskiy Yu.A, Klinov D.A. Effektivnost’ transmutacii oskolkov deleyniya [Transmutation Efficiency of Fission Fragments.] Izvestiya Vuzov. Yadernaja Energetika. 2000, no. 4, pp. 38-46.
4. Korovin Yu.A., Maksimushkina A.V., Natalenko A.A. Interaktivnaya sistema po raschetu izotopnogo sostava i navedennoy aktivnosti obluchennyih materialov perspektivnyih YaEU [Interactive System for Calculating the Isotope Composition and Induced Radioactivity of Irradiated Materials on Nuclear Power Facilities]. Vestnik NRNU MEPhI. 2013, V. 2, no. 1, pp. 79-84.
5. Korovin Yu.A., Natalenko A.A., Saenko A.V. Verifikatsiya i validatsiya modeley vysokoenergeticheskih nuklon-yadernyh vzaimodeystviy na baze programmnogo kompleksa CADEP [Verification and validation of models of high-energy nucleon-nucleus interactions based on software system CADEP]. Nuclear Physics and Engineering. 2013, v. 1, no. 6, pp. 504-511.
6. Korovin Yu.A., Konobeev A.Yu., Pereslavtsev P.E., Stankovsky A.Yu. Yadernyie dannyie dlya issledovaniya radiatsionnyih effektov, aktivatsii i transmutatsii materialov, obluchaemyih chastitsami promezhutochnyih energiy [Nuclear Data for the study of radiation effects, activation and transmutation of materials irradiated by intermediate energy particles]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 1996, no. 6, p. 76.
7. Konobeev A.Yu., Korovin Yu.A. Natalenko A.A., et al. Neytronnaya biblioteka aktivatsionnyih faylov IEAF-2005 v energeticheskom diapazone ot 150 MeV do 1 GeV [Neutron activation library files “IEAF-2005” in the energy range from 150 MeV to 1 GeV]. Izvestya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2007, no. 2, p. 8.
8. Konobeev A.Yu., Korovin Yu.A. Natalenko A.A., et al. Biblioteka protonnyih aktivatsionnyih yadernyih dannyih HEPAD-2008 [Library of proton activation nuclear data HEPAD-2008]. Izvestya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2009, no. 3, p. 97.
9. Konobeyev A.Yu., Broeders C.H.M., Fischer U. et al. The Proton Activation Data File PADF-2007. DOI:10.1051/ndata:07352.
10. TRADE – Final feasibility report. The Working Group on TRADE, TRADE PC.0 FS 0020, March 2002. Available at: http://www.trade.enea.it
11. Forrest R.A. FISPACT-2001: User manual (UKAEA FUS 450, 2001).
12. Petrovich C. SP-FISPACT2001. A Computer Code for Activation and Decay Calculations For Intermediate Energies. A Connection Of FISPACT With MCNPX, ERG/2001/10 (ENEA, 2001).
13. Cepraga D.G., Frisoni M., Cambi G. Fusion Engineering and Design 69 (2003) pp.719-722.
14. Neural Network. Available at: http://www.mathworks.com/products/neural-network/
15. Mark Hudson Beale, Martin T. Hagan, Howard B. Demuth. Neural Network Toolbox TM User’s Guide R2013b
16. EXFOR Library. Available at: http://www-nds.iaea.org/exfor/exfor.htm