+++

categories="article"
date="2014-07-14T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2014-02"
issue_name="2014 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file="pdf/2014/02/2014-02-article-13.pdf"
first_page="118"
last_page="127"
udc="621.039.516"
title="Stochastic theory of zero power nuclear reactors. Part 2. Probability of degeneration for a branching process and some issues of estimating the probability of a nuclear accident"
original_title="Стохастическая теория ядерных реакторов нулевой мощности. Часть 2. Вероятность вырождения ветвящегося процесса и вопросы оценки вероятности возникновения ядерной аварии"
authors=["VolkovYuV"]
tags=["branching process", "degeneration probability", "neutron population", "uncontrolled reactor power excursion due to prompt neutrons", "nuclear accident", "model", "fission process", "self'sustaining fission chain reaction"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.13"

+++

A formula has been derived to estimate the degeneration probability in which the conditional probability that the fission process will not stop by the time t is determined by using a system of non'linear differential equations presented in the paper. It follows from the formula that whatever the breeding ratio, a branching process with a probability of one will never arise in a nuclear reactor without an external excitation.

A general relationship has been found for an asymptotic value of probability that the fission process will stop in the nuclear reactor. It has been shown that Hansen’s model is a quadratic approximation of the general model and always overestimates this probability.

The paper presents a theoretical analysis which shows that Hansen’s model underestimates the probability of a nuclear accident as compared to the estimates derived by using the general model presented in the paper.

### References

1. Volkov Yu. V. Stohasticheskaja teorija jadernyh reaktorov nulevoj moshhnosti. Chast’
1. Fizicheskaja i matematicheskaja modeli [Stochastic Theory of Zero Power Nuclear Reactors. Part 1. Physical and Mathematical Models]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya rnergetika. 2013, no.4, pp. 127-134.
2. Sevast’yanov B. A. Vetvjashhiesja processy [Branching Processes]. Мoscow, Nauka Publ., 1971. (in Russian)
3. Sudek G. Problemy kinetiki reaktora. V sb. Teorija jadernyh reaktorov [Aspects of Reactor Kinetics. In Reactor Theory] Мoscow, Gosatomizdat Publ., 1963. (in Russian)
4. Uhrig R. Statisticheskie metody v fizike jadernyh reaktorov [Statistical Methods in Reactor Physics]. Мoscow, Atomizdat Publ., 1974. (in Russian)
5. Gnedenko B. V., Kovalenko I. N. Vvedenie v teoriju massovogo obsluzhivanija [Introduction to Queueing Theory]. Мoscow, Nauka Publ., 1966. (in Russian)
6. Hansen G.E. Assembly of Fissionable Material in the Presence of a Weak Neutron Source. Nucl. Sci. Eng. 1960, v. 8, pp. 709-719.
7. Hankins D.E. Effect of Reactivity Addition Rate and of Weak Neutron Source on the Fission Yield of Uranium Solutions. Nucl. Sci. Eng. 1966, v. 26, pp. 110-116.
8. Shabalin E.P. Impul’snye reaktory na bystryh nejtronah [Fast Neutron Pulsed Reactors]. Мoscow, Atomizdat Publ., 1976. (in Russian)