+++

categories="article"
date="2021-09-23T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2021-03"
issue_name="2021 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/03/02.pdf"
first_page="18"
last_page="28"
udc="621.039"
title="Increasing the Production of the Mo-99 Isotope by Modernizing the Design of Targets Irradiated in the Experimental Channels of the VVR-с Reactor"
original_title="Увеличение наработки изотопа Мо-99 путем модернизации конструкции мишеней, облучаемых в экспериментальных каналах реактора ВВРц"
authors=["PakholikDA", "KochnovOY", "KolesovVV", "FomichevVV"]
tags=["molybdenum-99", "VVR-c reactor", "experimental channel", "target for the production of Mo-99"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactor"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.02"

+++

There are various ways to obtain Mo-99. Some of them are widely used in industrial production, others are in the research stage with the aim of increasing the product yield. The main industrial method for obtaining Mo-99 using a nuclear reactor is the fragmentation method. This method provides for the presence of a uranium target and a nuclear reactor. The target is placed in the channel of the reactor core and irradiated with neutrons for the required time. After that, the target is removed from the channel to the ‘hot’ chamber for the chemical separation of Mo-99. This is how Mo-99 is obtained practically all over the world.

The paper considers the fragmentation method for producing Mo-99, which is There are various ways to obtain Mo-99. Some of them are widely used in industrial production, others are in the research stage with the aim of increasing the product yield. The main industrial method for obtaining Mo-99 using a nuclear reactor is the fragmentation method. This method provides for the presence of a uranium target and a nuclear reactor. The target is placed in the channel of the reactor core and irradiated with neutrons for the required time. After that, the target is removed from the channel to the ‘hot’ chamber for the chemical separation of Mo-99. This is how Mo-99 is obtained practically all over the world. The paper considers the fragmentation method for producing Mo-99, which is

### References

1. Kochnov O.Yu., Levchenko Yu.D., Chusov I.A. Thermal-hydraulic substantiation of the possibility of installing containers with uranium-containing material in the experimental channel of the VVR-ts reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 62-72 (in Russian).
2. KochnovO.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V. Evaluation of energy release in a target with uranium-containing material during the production of 99Mo using targets of an improved design at the VVR-ts reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 4, pp. 23-29 (in Russian).
3. Kamayev D.A. Ukraintsev V.F. Hitrik. D.V. The use of interval calculation technique for fuel characteristic uncertainty estimations into a fuel cycle. Proc. of the International Conference «Advances in Nuclear Analysis and Simulation». PHYSOR-2006. Vancouver. Canada. Report B032. 2006.
4. VisualBurnOut. Certificate of state registration of the computer program No. 2009617021. Registered in the Register of Computer Programs on December 9, 2009 (in Russian).
5. Korkodinov Ya.A. An overview of a family of k-ε models for turbulence modeling. Vestnik Permskogo Gosudarstvennogo Politekhnicheskogo Universiteta. 2013, v. 15, no. 2, pp. 5-16 (in Russian).
6. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Zevyakin A.S., Fomin R.V. Thermal-hydraulic calculation of the maximum fuel and water temperature in the MAK-2 unit. Atomnaya Energiya. 2019, v. 127, iss. 3, pp. 135-137 (in Russian).
7. Rivkin S.L., Alexandrov A.A. Thermophysical Properties of Water and Steam. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1980, 424 p. (in Russian).
8. Kirillov P.L., Yuriev Yu.S., Bobkov V.P. Handbook on Thermohydraulic Calculations. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1990, 360 p. (in Russian).
9. Kutateladze S.S., Borishansky V.M. Heat Transfer Handbook. Moscow. Gosenergoizdat Publ., 1958, 414 p. (in Russian).
10. Mikheev M.A., Mikheeva I.M. Basics of Heat Transfer. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1977, 344 p. (in Russian).
11. Kolesov V.V., Kochnov O.Yu., Fomin R.V. Evaluation of the increase in 99Mo production with different core layouts at the VVR-ts reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 1, pp. 110-116 (in Russian).
12. The Supply of Medical Radioisotopes «Medical Isotope Supply in the Future: Production Capacity and Demand Forecast for the 99Mo/99mTc Market, 2015-2020». 2014.
13. Chusov I.A., Shelegov A.S., KochnovO.Yu. Features of the design of research reactors of pressurized water type. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 3, pp. 116-126 (in Russian).
14. Akhmedzyanov D.A. Verification of the calculation of the heat transfer process in the ANSYS CFX software package. Vestnik Ufimskogo Gosudarstvennogo Aviatsionnogo Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta. 2009, v. 13, no. 2, pp. 226-232 (in Russian).