+++

categories="article"
date="2021-09-23T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2021-03"
issue_name="2021 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/03/04.pdf"
first_page="44"
last_page="57"
udc="621.039.517"
title="Studies of Critical Heat Fluxes in Small Diameter Channels"
original_title="Исследования критических тепловых потоков в каналах малого диаметра"
authors=["BelozerovVI"]
tags=["critical heat flow", "departure from nucleate boiling", "boiling margin", "highly efficient cooling technology"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.04"

+++

The paper presents the results of experimental studies of critical heat flows in vertical small diameter channels, when the coolant moves from bottom to top, which were carried out in the Obninsk branch of MEPhI in the 70s of the last century but have not become widespread due to the lack of demand for their practical use. Nowadays, the interest in such works is manifested, first of all, in the development of compact plants and devices, particularly in nuclear power engineering.

As a coolant, water, Freon-12 and 96% ethyl alcohol were used. High velocities of subcooled liquid at high heat fluxes on the channel wall lead to the so-called «fast crisis» of heat transfer. In this case, the magnitude of the heat flux depends mainly on the parameters of the coolant flow in the wall zone rather than the flow core. The «slow crisis» is mainly observed at high vapor concentrations, relatively low mass flow rates and in an annular-dispersed flow. The value of the critical heat flow in this case depends mainly on the flow parameters in the core, which are probably close to the average coolant flow parameters. The conditions in the near-wall region are also largely determined by the flow in the core. High heat transfer coefficients in a flow moving at high speed usually result in a much smaller and slower rise in the wall temperature. Sometimes a DNB heat flux can occur bypassing the boiling process. In the core of a VVER-type reactor operating in its nominal mode, surface boiling is present in a number of fuel rods. Probably, surface boiling will also be present in transportable and small-size nuclear power plants. Therefore, an important task is to conduct relevant research in this area.

### References

1. Belyaev A.V. Experimental Study of Hydrodynamics and Heat Exchange in Small Diameter Channels at High Reduced Pressures. Ph.D. Thesis Abstract. Moscow. National Research University MEI Publ., 2018, 20 p. (in Russian).
2. Malakhovsky S.A. Heat Exchange at Boiling in the Conditions of the Forced Current of the Swirling Flow in Channels of Small Diameter. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) Diss. Abstr. Moscow. GOU VPO MEI (Tekhnichesky Universitet) Publ., 2008, 20 p. (in Russian).
3. Inasaka F., Nariai H. and Shimura T. Pressure Drops in Subcooled Flow Boiling in Narrow Tubes. Heat Transfer Japanese Research. 1989, v.18, pp. 70-82.
4. Kandlikar S.G. Fundamental Issues Related to Flow Boiling in Minichannels and Microchannels. Exp. Therm. Fluid Science. 2002, v. 26, pp. 389-407.
5. Dedov A.V., Komov A.T., Varava A.N., YagovV.V. Boiling heat transfer in swirl flow of subcooled water. Proc. of the XII-th International Heat Transfer Conference, Grenoble, France. 2002, pp. 731-736.
6. Dedov A.V. Features of Boiling in the Underheated Flow. Teploenergetika. 2009, no. 8, pp. 62-69 (in Russian).
7. Yagov V.V., Luzin V.A. Boiling Crisis in Conditions of Forced Motion of Underheated Liquid. Teploenergetika. 1985, no. 10, pp. 52-54 (in Russian).
8. Tong W., Bergles A.E., Jensen M.K. Pressure Drop with Highly Subcooled Flow Boiling in Small-Diameter Tubes. Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science. 1997, v. 15, no. 3, рр. 202-212.
9. Zakharov S.V. Model of a Heat Transfer Crisis in Bubble Boiling of Liquids in Channels at High Reduced Pressures. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) Diss. Abstr. Moscow. Natsional’ny Issledovatel’sky Universitet MEI Publ., 2003, 20 p. (in Russian).
10. Tolubinsky V.I. Heat Exchange at Boiling. Kiev. Naukova Dumka Publ., 1980, 315 p. (in Russian).
11. Kirillov P.L. Crisis of Heat Exchange in Channels. Atomnaya Energiya. 1996, v. 80, iss. 5, pp. 370-379 (in Russian).
12. Ornadsky A.P., Kichigin A.M. Study of Dependence of Critical Heat Load on Weighting Velocity, Underheating and Pressure. Teploenergetika. 1961, no. 2, pp. 75-79 (in Russian).
13. Skripov V.P. Metastable Liquid. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1972, 312 p. (in Russian).
14. Labuntsov D.A. Vapor Content of the Two-Phase Adiabatic Flow in the Vertical Channels. In Physical Bases of Power Engineering. Ed. by T.M. Muratov. Мoscow MEI Publ., 2000, pp. 204-212 (in Russian).
15. Rassokhin N.G., Ma Tsang-Wen, Melnikov V.N. Heat Transfer at Surface Boiling in Narrow Annular Channels. Teploenergetika. 1963, no. 5, pp. 83-85 (in Russian).
16. Yagov V.V., Luzin V.A. Approximate Physical Model of Boiling Crisis in Forced Flow of a Saturated Liquid. Teploenergetika. 1985, no. 3, pp. 2-5 (in Russian).
17. Kirillov P.L., Terentyeva M.I. Prandtl Turbulent Number (History and Modernity). Preprint GNTs RF-FEI 3271. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI Publ., 2017, 56 p. (in Russian).
18. Volynov M.A. Real Turbulence and Possibilities of Modification of L. Prandtl Semi-Emperial Theory. Fundamental’nye Issledovaniya. 2013, no. 10 (part 8), pp. 1676-1688 (in Russian).
19. Goldstein S. Theodore von Karman, 1881 – 1963. Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society. 1966, v. 12, pp. 335-365.
20. Martinelly E. Alkuni Teoremi Integrali per le Funzioni Analitiche di Piuvariabili Complesse. JFM64.0322.04, Zbl 0022.24002. 1938, v. 9, no. 7, pp. 269-283 (in Italian).
21. Petukhov B.S., Genin L.G., Kovalev S.A., Soloviev S.L. Heat Exchange in Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2003, 548 p. (in Russian).
22. Buleev N.I. Spatial Model of Turbulent Exchange. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1989, 343 p. (in Russian).
23. Kutateladze S.S. Fundamentals of Heat Transfer Theory. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1979, 416 p. (in Russian).
24. Mudawar I., Bowers M.B.Ultra-High Heat UX (CHF) for Cubcooled Water OW Boiling-1: CHF Data and Parametric Effects for Small Diameter Tubes. Int. J. Heat and Mass Transfer, 1999, v. 42, pp. 1405-1428.
25. Celata G.P., Cumo M., Mariani A. Assessment of Correlations and Modelsforthe Prediction of CHF in Water Subcooled Flow Boiling. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer. 1994, v. 37, pp. 2605-2640.
26. Chun Т., Baek W., Chang S.H. A Superheated Liquid Layer Depletion Model for Subcooled and Low Quality Critical Heat Flux. Proc. of the VII-th Int. Conf. On Nuclear Engineering, Tokyo, ICONE-7501, 1999, pp. 1-2.
27. Vasiliev A.N. Heat Exchange Crisis Associated with Abrupt Liquid Boiling in Channels of Small Diameter. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) Diss. Abstr. Kiev. Institut Tekhnicheskoy Teplofiziki Publ., 1972, 31 p. (in Russian).
28. Kirillov P.L., Terentyeva M.I., Deniskina N.B. Thermophysical Properties of Materials of Nuclear Technology. Moscow. IzdAt Publ., 2007, 200 p. (in Russian).
29. Boltenko E.A., Pomet’ko R.S., Katan I.B., Zyatnina O.A. Influence of Pipe Diameter on Critical Heat Flux. Proc. of the Intern. Symposium «Thermophysics-90». Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1991, v. 2, pp. 400-403 (in Russian).
30. Poletavkin P.G., Shapkin N.A. Heat Transfer at Surface Boiling of Water. Teploenergetika. 1958, no. 5, pp. 72-76 (in Russian).
31. Remizov O.V. On the Beginning of Surface Boiling. Proc. of the IV-th Russian Regional Conference on Heat Exchange (RNKT-4), Oct. 23-27, 2006. Vol. 4. Boiling, Boiling Crises, Overcrisis Heat Exchange. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2006, pp. 194-196. Available at: http://rnkt.ru/2006/tom-4/page-194/ (accessed Jan. 31, 2021) (in Russian).