+++

categories="article"
date="2021-09-23T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2021-03"
issue_name="2021 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/03/08.pdf"
first_page="97"
last_page="106"
udc="621.039.542.342"
title="A Method to Optimize the Thermal Stability of Uranium-Gadolinium Fuel"
original_title="Способ оптимизации термической стабильности уран-гадолиниевого топлива"
authors=["KarpeevaАE", "KolosovskiyVG", "PakhomovDS", "SkomorokhaАE", "TimoshinIS"]
tags=["thermal stability", "resintering", "uranium-gadolinium fuel", "fuel pellets", "pore agent", "porosity", "fuel rod", "U-Gd fuel rod"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.08"

+++

Thermal stability (resintering) of uranium-gadolinium fuel depends largely on porosity, the size-based distribution of pores and grains, the ratio between open and closed pores, etc. In turn, porosity and size-based distribution of pores depend on the characteristics of the initial uranium dioxide powder and the fuel pellet fabrication technology. The existing nuclear fuel fabrication technology securely provides for the required properties, which make it possible to operate nuclear fuel reliably and safely to a burn-up level of up to ~ 60 MW day/kg of uranium [1]. Meanwhile, recent trends have been towards increasing the burn-up depth and the duration of the irradiation cycle to refueling, and achieving a zero failure level [2 – 4], this requiring integrated studies to be conducted at all nuclear fuel manufacturing stages, including determination of the technology-structure-property dependences.  In 2008, as shown in [5], the results obtained after the resintering test complied with the radiation-induced densification of fuel achievable at a relatively low burn-up of 10 MW·day/kg. This was also confirmed in [6, 7] and in a work by A.S. Shcheglov and V.N. Proselkov on the peculiarities of the VVER U-Gd fuel rod BOL behavior [8], where the calculated results met the measured values. The paper shows the effects of the pore agent quantity introduced in the fuel pellet fabrication process, and a method has been proposed to achieve the required porosity for stabilizing the uranium-gadolinium fuel resintering.

### References

1. Molchanov V.L. Nuclear fuel for VVER reactors. Current State and Prospects: Proc. of the V1th International Conference «Ensuring NPP Safety with VVER». Podolsk. FGUP OKB Gidropress Publ., 2007. Available at: www.gidropress.podolsk.ru B files B proceedings B mntk2007 B presentations (accessedMar. 01, 2021) (in Russian).
2. Experiences and Trends of Manufacturing Technology of Advanced Nuclear Fuels. IAEA1TECDOC series, ISSN 101114289. 2012, no. 1686, pp. 34-35.
3. Petrov I.V., Basov V.V. Behavior of Uranium-Erbium Oxide Fuel Pellets in the Process of Cyclic Thermal Treatment. Atomnaya Energiya. 2009, v. 107, iss. 4, pp. 221-224. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-010-9225-z (in Russian).
4. Sokolova I.D. Experience in the development of fuel for PWR reactors and its operation at the French nuclear power plant. Atomnaya Tekhnika za Rubezhom. 2007, no. 10, pp. 3-11 (in Russian).
5. Draft Regulatory Guide DG-1189. An Acceptable Model and Related Statistical Methods for the Analytics of Fuel Densification. NSNRC. Dec. 2008, pp. 1-10.
6. Maier G., Assmann H., Dцrr W. Resinter Testing in Relation to In-Pile Densification. Journal of Nuclear Materrials. 1988, v. 153, pp. 213-220; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(88)90213-9 .
7. Mikheev E.N., Fedotov A.V., Malygin V.B., Izhutov A.L. et al. In-Pile Investigation Results of Re-Sintering for Uranium Dioxide Fuel with Large Grain Size at Temperature 650-700°C. Proc. of the Int. Conf. «Top Fuel 2016». Boise. ID. Sept. 11-15, 2016, pp. 463-468
8. Shcheglov A.S., Volkov B.Yu., Proselkov V.N. Peculiarities of Behavior of VVER Fuel Rods at the Beginning of the Fuel Company. Proc. of the X1th Int. Conf. on WWER Fuel Perfomance, Modelling and Experimental Support. Bulgaria. Sept. 7-14, 2013, pp. 359-368.
9. Odeychuk N.P., Sirenko S.A., Bolshak A.I. et al. Some characteristics of experimental two-layer uranium-gadolinium pellets. VANT. Ser: Yaderno1Reaktornye Konstanyy. 2008, iss. 1, pp. 133-135 (in Russian).
10. Gorsky V.V. Using of Burnout Absorbers Integrated with Fuel Pellets in LWR. Atomnaya Tekhnika za Rubezhom. 2000, no. 7, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
11. Standard ASTM C776-06 Specification for Sintered Uranium Dioxide Pellets. 2011, pp. 160-163.
12. Gontar A.S., Kucherov R.Ya., Nelidov M.V. The Effect of Intra-Grain Pores on Swelling. UO2. Atomnaya Energiya. 1985, v. 58, iss. 1, pp. 54-55; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01123246 (in Russian).
13. Oguma M. Integrity Degradation of UO2 Pellets Subjected to Thermal Shock. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1985, v. 127, no. 1, pp. 67-76; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(85)90062-5 .
14. Makhova V.A., Sokolova I.D. Optimization of Microstructure of UO2-Fuel. Atomnaya Tekhnika za Rubezhom. 1988, no. 19, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
15. Assmann H., Dцrr W., Peehs M. Control of UO2 Microstructure by Oxidative Sintering. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 1986, v. 140, no. 1, pp. 1-6; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3115(86)90189-3 .
16. Boyko V.I., Kolpakov G.N., Selivanikova O.V. Fuel Materials in Nuclear Energy. Textbook. Tomsk. Tomsky Polytekhnichesky Universitet Publ., 2008, 186 p. (in Russian).
17. Demyanov P.G., Novikov V.V. et al. Modeling of lengthening of uranium-gadolinium fuel elements of VVER-1000. Proc. of the XI1th Conf. on Reactor Materials Science. JSC GNTs NIIAR, Dimitrovgrad. 2019, pp. 61-62 (in Russian).
18. Bozhko Yu.V., Malygin V.B. Changing the size of tablets made of modified uraniumьdioxide during irradiation. Electronic Scientific Journal «Modern Problems of Science and Education» (science-education.ru). 2013, iss. 3 (in Russian).
19. Karpeeva A.E., Pakhomov D.S. et al. Method of Producing Uranium1Gadolinium Nuclear Fuel. Russian Federation, Patent Application No. 2020132997 dated Oct. 06, 2020 (in Russian).
20. Kiparisov S.S., Libenson G.A. Powder Metallurgy. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1980, 496 p. (in Russian).