+++

categories="article"
date="2021-09-23T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2021-03"
issue_name="2021 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/03/10.pdf"
first_page="121"
last_page="133"
udc="338.012:311.313:303.2"
title="Dynamic Statistical Assessment of the Competitiveness of an Energy Generating Company (as Exemplified by Rosenergoatom Concern JSC)"
original_title="Динамическая статистическая оценка конкурентоспособности энергогенерирующей компании (на примере АО «Концерн Росэнергоатом»)"
authors=["BurtsevaTA", "KhvorostyannikovSS", "KuznetsovaAA"]
tags=["competitiveness", "energy generating company", "normative and evaluative model"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.10"

+++

The depletion of traditional organic energy sources and aggravated environmental problems are the reasons why the level of energy efficiency is an important factor in the competitiveness of the national economy. Russia ranks third in the world in terms of total energy consumption and its economy is distinguished by a high level of energy intensity (amount of energy per unit of GDP). In 2019, this figure was 9.62 tons of fuel equivalent (toe) per 1 million rubles, which is 40% higher than the world average.

The low energy efficiency of the Russian economy is a widely recognized problem. A special decree of the Government of Russia in 2018 sets the task of increasing the level of energy efficiency of the Russian economy by 23% by 2030. One of the ways to solve this problem is the development of nuclear energy, and increasing the competitiveness of nuclear energy is one of the key areas of the national economy. In this connection, solving the problem of assessing the competitiveness of the nuclear industry and its leading companies occupies a key place among the practical scientific problems, the solution of which is facilitated by the results presented by the authors in this article.

Rosenergoatom Concern JSC is the leading energy generating company in the Russian nuclear industry. The results of the study of the competitiveness of Rosenergoatom Concern JSC were obtained on the basis of the author’s methodology for assessing the competitiveness of an energy generating company. The novelty of the presented methodology lies in the developed normative and evaluative model and the coefficients of the competitiveness of an energy generating company.

The advantages of the author’s model are that it makes it possible (1) to obtain integral assessments of the competitiveness of a power generating company at short time intervals for a large number of indicators and (2) to quantitatively measure the influence of factors of the competitiveness of a power generating company, provided that the grouping of indicators of the competitiveness of a power generating company is justified by the factors. The two factors considered by the authors were: general market and industry.

According to the results of the study, it was revealed that Rosenergoatom Concern JSC has a positive increase in the competitiveness indicator to a greater extent due to the industry factor. In this regard, it was concluded that, within the framework of state policy, it is advisable to strengthen support for the Russian nuclear industry by creating additional conditions and opportunities for its energy generating companies in the domestic energy market.

### References

1. Khvorostyannikov S.S. Competitiveness of the nuclear industry. Proc. of the XXXIV6th All6 Russian Scientific Conference of Young Scientists «Reforms in Russia and Management Problems». Moscow. April 17-18, 2019. Moscow. State University of Management Publ., 2019, pp. 165-167 (in Russian).
2. Kaplan R.S. and D.P. Norton. Using the balanced scorecard as a strategic management system. Harvard Business Review. 1996, no. 1, pp. 75-85.
3. Kaplan R.S. and D.P. Norton.Why does business need a balanced scorecard? Journal of Cost Management. 1997, no. 3, pp. 5-10.
4. Martinsons M., R. Davison and D. Tse. The balanced scorecard: A foundation for the strategic management of information systems. Decision Support Systems. 1999, v. 25, no. 1, pp. 71-88.
5. Norrekli, H. The balanced scorecard: What is the score? A rhetorical analysis of the balanced scorecard. Accounting, Organizations and Society. 2003, v. 28, no. 6, pp. 591-619.
6. Paladino B. 5 key principles of corporate performance management: How do Balanced Scorecard Hall of Fame, Malcolm Baldrige, Sterling, Fortune 100, APQC, and Forbes award winners drive value? Strategic Finance. 2007, no. 6, pp. 39-45.
7. Schonberger R.J. Lean performance management (Metrics don’t add up). Cost Management. 2008, no. 1, pp. 5-10.
8. Syroezhin I.M. Improving the system of indicators of efficiency and quality. Moscow. Economics, 1980, 191 p. (in Russian).
9. Stojanovich Dragisa. A comparative analysis of the economic movement on the basis of growth matrix. Socio6Economic Planning Sciences. 1986, v. 20, no. 2, pp. 75-78.
10. Saarepera M.I. Concentric analytical matrix models in economic analysis. Preprint. Tallinn. Tallinnsky Polytekhnichesky Institut Publ., 1987, 142 p. (in Russian).
11. Eissner Yu.N. Organizational and economic dimensions in planning and management. Leningrad. Leningradsky Universit Publ., 1988, 144 p. (in Russian).
12. Zakharchenko N.N. Economic measurements: theory and methods. St.Petersburg. Gosudarstvenny Universitet Ekonomiki i Finansov Publ., 1993, 157 p. (in Russian).
13. Zavgorodnyaya A.V. Diagnostics and modeling of the company environment. St.Petersburg. Gosudarstvenny Universitet Ekonomiki i Finansov Publ., 1999, 300 p. (in Russian).
14. Zhambekova R.L. Methodology of systemic economic diagnostics of an enterprise. Dr. Sci. (Economics) Diss. St. Petersburg. Gosudarstvenny Universitet Ekonomiki i Finansov Publ., 2000, 334 p. (in Russian).
15. Burtseva T.A. Indicative model for monitoring the investment attractiveness of a region. Voprosy Statistiki. 2009, no. 6, pp. 37-45 (in Russian).
16. Burtseva T.A. A normative model of statistical estimation of management efficiency regarding municipal area development. Teoriya i Praktika Obschestvennogo Razvitiya. 2012, no. 8, pp. 324-329. Available at: http://www.teoria-practica.ru/-8-2012/economics/burtseva.pdf (accessed Jun. 15, 2021) (in Russian).
17. Borovkova O.L., Burtseva T.A. et al. On the question of the methodology of statistical assessment and monitoring of the investment attractiveness of territorial economic systems. In monograph «Territories of innovative development». Ed. A.A. Sotnikov. Moscow. Gosudarstvenny Universitet Upravleniya Publ., 2010, pp. 135-171. ISBN 978-5-91070-055-4 (in Russian).
18. Svetunkov S.G., Zagranovskaya A.V., Svetunkov I.S. Assessment of the development of regions, the dynamics of their socio-economic state. In monograph «Complex analysis and modeling of uneven socio6economic development of Russian regions». Available at: http://sergey.svetunkov.ru/economics/complex/MD2012, 2012 (accessed Jun. 15, 2021) (in Russian).
19. Pogostinsky Yu. A. Normative models of system analysis of economic activity of an enterprise: Monograph. St.Petersburg. Gosudarstvenny Universitet Ekonomiki i Finansov Publ., 1999, 160 p. (in Russian).
20. Ivleva L.N. Method of Building of the Balanced Indicators System as an Instrument of Enterprise Development Monitoring. Cheboksary. Chuvashsky Gosudarstvenny Universitet Publ., 2008, pp. 382-384 (in Russian).
21. Burtseva T.A., Chausow N.Yu. Measurement of Scorecard Balance. International Electronic Journal of Mathematics Education. 2016, v. 11, no. 9, pp. 3361-3370.
22. Khvorostyannikov S.S. Regulatory and evaluation model of Russian nuclear industry competitiveness. Vestnik Altajskoy Academii Ekonomiki i Prava. 2020, no. 6-1, pp. 134-143. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17513/vaael.1175 .
23. Annual Financial Statements of Rosenergoatom Concern JSC for 2018. Available at: https://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/acc/acc76be3f370d2d8ebe77d44fa25ef82.pdf (accessed Jun. 15, 2021) (in Russian).
24. Annual Financial Statements of Rosenergoatom Concern JSC for 2019. Available at: https://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/d94/d94e91d8bb02e238fa8007aa6198df0a.pdf (accessed Jun. 15, 2021) (in Russian).