+++

categories="article"
date="2021-09-23T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2021-03"
issue_name="2021 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/03/11.pdf"
first_page="134"
last_page="145"
udc="621.039"
title="Mathematical Modeling of Hydraulic Processes in the Collector Scheme of Connection of Pipelines of the Steam Generator Purge System of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 Power Unit No. 1"
original_title="Математическое моделирование гидравлических процессов в коллекторной схеме объединения трубопроводов системы продувки парогенераторов энергоблока № 1 Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["YaurovSV", "BorovoyAV", "DanilovAD"]
tags=["steam generator", "purge", "operation", "steam generator collector pocket", "operation", "electromagnetic valve", "modernization", "water-chemical regime", "purge collector"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.11"

+++

The article proposes to consider one of the directions of modernization of the steam generator purge system of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 power unit No. 1, based on the experience of putting the system into operation in 2016 [1, 2].

The results of mathematical modeling of the hydraulics of pipelines from the pockets of the collectors of steam generators (SG) of the purge system, combined in one collector, are presented. The calculations were performed in the thermohydraulic CFX module of the Ansys software package [3, 4].

Ansys CFX is based on the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations by the control volume method, and a grid partition of the flow region is used as the input geometric (structural) data.

The results of the calculation showed a significant unevenness in the distribution of purge water consumption from the pockets of the SG collectors due to the use of a collector in the technological scheme, which combines the purge pipelines (purge collector).

Calculations of the symmetric scheme of connection of purge pipelines revealed its advantage in comparison with the collector scheme, there is no unevenness in the distribution of purge water flows from the pockets of the SG collectors.

The authors suggest:
1) to exclude the collector scheme of connection of pipelines from the structure of the system of purging of PG and to apply the symmetric scheme of connection of pipelines.;
2) use multi-way position control valves as part of the technological scheme instead of electromagnetic and electric drive valves (an alternative to the symmetrical scheme).

These improvements will ensure the uniform removal of iron oxides from the pockets of steam generators.

Modification of steam generator purge collectors and / or installation of multi-pass cranes can also be performed on power units with PGV-1000M steam generators.

### References

1. Yaurov S.V., Galiev K.F., Borovoy A.V., Volnov A.S. Experience of commissioning the AES-2006 design (V-392M reactor plant) steam generator blowdown system. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 151-161 (in Russian).
2. Volnov A.S., Borovoy A.V., Goncharov E.V., Yaurov S.V. Commissioning of the steam generator purge system of the NPP-2006 project (RU V-392M). Upgrade proposals. Proc. of the XIII8th International Scientific and Practical Conference on Nuclear Energy. Sevastopol. Sevastopolsky Gosudatstvenny Universitet Publ., 2017, pp 56-57 (in Russian).
3. Buryaka V.A., Fokin V.G., Soldusova E.A., Glazunova N.A., Adeyanov I.E. Engineering Analysis in Ansys Workbench. Samara. Samarsky Gosudatstvenny Tekhnichesky Universitet Publ., 2010, 271 p. (in Russian).
4. Snegirev A.Yu. High8Performance Computing in Technical Physics. Numerical Modeling of Turbulent flows: Textbook. St.Petersburg. SPbPU Publ., 2009, 143 p. (in Russian).
5. Reactor Installation V8392M. Norms of Water8Chemical Regime of the Second Circuit of the Steam Generator. 392M D14. Podolsk. FGUP OKB «Gidropress» Publ., 2007, 21 р. (in Russian).
6. Lukasevich B.I., Trunov N.B., Dragunov Yu.G., Davidenko S.E. Steam Generators of VVER Reactor Installations for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. IKTs «Akademkniga» Publ., 2004, 391 p. (in Russian).
7. Rassokhin N.G. Steam Generator Sets of Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook for Universities. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 384 p. (in Russian).
8. Trunov N.B., Logvinov S.A., Dragunov Yu.G. Hydrodynamic and Thermochemical Processes in Steam Generators of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2001. 318 p. (in Russian).
9. Margulova T.Kh. Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook for Universities. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 1994, 288 p. (in Russian).
10. Povarov V.P. Analysis of damage welds No. 111 in the PGV-1000 steam generator and damage repair proposals. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 1, pp. 68-73 (in Russian).
11. Netyaga N.N., Saakyan S.P., Povarov V.P. Assessment of risks of damage of welded joint of manifold and steam generator connection sleeve for NPP with VVER. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 4, pp. 41-43 (in Russian).
12. Bakirov M.B., Kiselev A.S., Levchuk V.I., Povarov V.P., Gromov A.F. Analysis of operational loads in the zone of a steam generator collector to nozzle weld joint considering transient thermally induced force effects. Vestnik Voronezhskogo Gosudarstvennogo Universiteta. 2014, no. 6, pp. 111-117 (in Russian).
13. Bakirov M.B., Levchuk V.I., Povarov V.P., Gromov A.F. An analysis of factors causing the occurrence of off-design thermally induced force effects in the zone of weld joint No. 111-1 in a PGV-1000M steam generator and recommendations on excluding them. Teploenergetika. 2014, v. 61, no. 8, pp. 541-550(in Russian).
14. Bakirov M.B., Povarov V.P., Gromov A.F., Levchuk V.I. Development of technology for continuous acoustic-emission monitoring of metal operational damaging of nuclear power plants main equipment. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 15-24 (in Russian).
15. Bakirov M.B., Eremin A.A., Levchuk V.I., Povarov V.P., Gromov A.F. Development of technology of continuous control of integrity of metal in critical zones of the equipment of the NPP by an ultrasonic method. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Severo8 Kavkasky Region. Tekhnicheskie Nauki. 2014, no. 6, pp. 60-67 (in Russian).
16. Povarov V.P., Saakian S.P., Chepurko V.A. Statical data analysis for the header to steam generator pipe welding assembly failures, NPP with VVER type reactors. Vestnik Kibernetiki. 2017, no. 2 (26), pp. 24-31 (in Russian).
17. Shchelik S.V., Shestakov N.B., Bogomolov I.N. Selection and optimization of the purge mode of the Kalinin NPP steam generators. In Sbornik Trudov FGUP OKB «Gidropress» 2006. Podolsk. FGUP OKB «Gidropress» Publ., 2006, pp. 37-45 (in Russian).
18. Siriapina L.A., Margulova T.Kh. Improving the efficiency of purging steam generators of nuclear power plants with VVER. Teploenergetika. 1984, no. 2, pp. 59-60 (in Russian).
19. Zhukov A.G., Lukashov Yu.Yu. Progressive concepts of optimization of technological systems for purging steam generators of nuclear power plants with VVER-1000" Izvestiya vuzov. Severo8Kavkasky Region. Tekhnicheskie Nauki. 2010, no. 1, pp. 51-54 (in Russian).
20. Babich A.Yu., Goryaev E.Yu., Grushkin A.N., Knyazev R.A., Matveev M.V., Nikitin B.Yu., Novikov A.Yu., Petrov A.R., Ponomareva T.V., Ryzhov S.N., Saitov R.R., Timshina D.K., Chudinova V.A., Agafonova N.D. Selection of optimal steam generator design for the VVER-1200 block: comparison of steam generator characteristics in 4- and 2-loops components. SPbPU Science Week Proceeding of the Scientific Forum with International Participation. St.Petersburg. Institut Energetiky i Transportnykh Sistem Publ., 2015, pp. 123-125 (in Russian).