+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2017-01"
issue_name="2017 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="03"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/01/03.pdf"
first_page="29"
last_page="41"
udc="621.039.58:536.423.4"
title="Experimental investigation of heat mass exchange processes at the VVER steam generator in emergency condensing mode"
original_title="Экспериментальное исследование тепломассообменных процессов при работе парогенератора ВВЭР в аварийном конденсационном режиме"
authors=["ShlepkinAS", "MorozovAV", "KalyakinDS", "SoshkinaAS"]
tags=["PWR", "steam generators", "passive safety systems", "passive heat removal system", "non-condensable gases", "steam-gas mixture"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.03"

+++

To evaluate the efficiency of the VVER steam generator and investigation of the influence of the initial conditions of the accident on the processes of heat exchange in the steam generator (SG) tube bundle, the «GE2M-PG» facility was constructed at the JSC « SSC RF-IPPE ». It was used in two series of experiments with and without removal of the steam-gas mixture (SGM) of the steam generator cold collector.

In experiments with removal of the steam-gas mixture, it was found that the condensation of the steam generator power is largely dependent on the volume of gas concentration in a vapor stream, while their ratio in the gas mixture, as well as the physical properties of the gases do not have a noticeable effect on the SG condensation power. In addition, evaluations were made of the influence of the SGM flow removal from the cold collector on the steam generator operation in condensing mode. It turned out that a decrease ~ 25- in the SGM removal of the condensing power of the steam generator is reduced by ~ 28-.

The experiments without removal of the gas-vapor mixture made it possible to assess the impact of various non-condensable gases on the heat exchange process. It has been found that, in addition to the direct reduction of the heat transfer coefficient, the non-condensable gases have a negative impact on the passive heat removal system capacity. At the same time, the higher the accumulation rate of gases, the passive heat removal system power is greatly reduced. Also, a dependency was derived of temperature differences between the circuits, the steam generator power and the concentration of non-condensable gases.

### References

1. Kopytov I.I. «NPP-2006» project – the basis of the federal target program «Development of the nuclear power industry of Russia in 2007-2010 and goals for the future up to 2015». Abstracts of the Second International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power Industry». Moscow. VNIIAES Publ., 2008, pp. 60-65 (in Russian).
2. Kalyakin S.G., Sorokin A.P., Brewers V.A., Pometko R.S., Selivanov Y.U. Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V. Experimental research of thermal physical processes for the safety substantiation of new generation VVER. Atomnaya energiya. 2014, v. 116, iss. 4, pp. 241-246 (in Russian).
3. Remizov O.V., Morozov A.V., Tsiganok A.A. Heat transfer between the condensing steam and boiling water in a multiple-row horizontal tube bundle with natural convection. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk. Energetika. 2010, no. 2, pp. 152-158 (in Russian).
4. Ilchenko A.G., Zuev A.N., Haritonin I.E. Study of VVER-1000 unit operation in the mode of natural circulation of coolant. Vestnik IGEU. 2016, no. 2, pp. 1-5 (in Russian).
5. Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V. Modern development of passive heat removal systems of water-cooled reactors. VANT. Ser. Physics of nuclear reactors. 2013, iss. 2, pp. 61-78 (in Russian).
6. Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V., Tsyganok A.A. Non-condensable gases effect on heat transfer processes between condensing steam and boiling water in heat exchanger with multirow horizontal tube bundle. Proceedings of 14-th International Heat Transfer Conference, IHTC14, 2010. pp. 629-635.
7. Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V. Experimental substantiation of the design features of passive core flooding system of the VVER reactor. Teploenergetika. 2012, no. 5, pp. 22-27 (in Russian).
8. Morozov A.V., Shlepkin A.S. Analysis of the effect of operating factors on the operation of model of VVER steam generator in a mode of steam condensation. VANT. Ser. Nuclear and reactor constants. 2016, no.3, pp. 91-99 (in Russian).
9. Welter K.B., Bajorek S.M., Woods B., Groome J., Reyes J.N. Confirmatory testing investigating advanced passive plant thermal-hydraulics. Proceedings of 13-th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, 2005, 256-264.
10. Gautier Al. Passive heat removal system with the «Base Operation Passive Heat Removal » strategy. Application with Primary Heat Exchangers. Proc. of ICONE 7, 1999, pp. 174-187.
11. Brettschuh W., Meseth J. Experimental verification of SWR 1000 passive components and systems. Proceedings of ICAPP 2007, 2007, pp. 74-76.
12. Schmidt H. Large Scale Verification of External RPV Cooling in Case of Severe Accident. Proc. of ICAPP’04, 2004, pp. 564-576.
13. Huggenberger M., Aubert C., Dreier J., Fischer O., Strassberger H.J. New passive decay heat removal tests in PANDA. Proc. of 6-th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering ICONE-6264, 1998, pp. 301-310.
14. Bezlepkin V.V. Semashko S.E., Sidorov V.G., Ivanov I.M., Zatevakhin M.A., Alekseev S.B. Design and experimental study of passive systems in the project of Leningrad NPP-2. Proceedings of the Second International Scientific and Technical Conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power Industry». Moscow. VNIIAES Publ., 2008, pp. 937-942 (in Russian).
15. Glaeser H. Uncertainty evaluation of thermal-hydraulic code resultes. International meeting on «Best-Estimate» Methods in Nuclear Installation Safety Analysis (BE-2000). Washington, DC (2000).
16. Morozov A.V., Shlyopkin A.S. The study of the model of VVER steam generator in condensing mode for different parameters of the emergency process. Proceedings of the IV International Scientific Conference «Innovative projects and nuclear energy technologies» (IRTC NIKIET-2016). Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2016, pp. 245-261 (in Russian).
17. Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V. Experimental study of the steam generator VVER models in condensing mode. Teploenergetika. 2012, no. 5, pp. 16-21 (in Russian).
18. Berkovich V.M., Peresadko V.G., Taranov G.S., Remizov O.V., Morozov A.V., Tsyganok A.A., Kalyakin D.S. Experimental study on Novovoronezh NPP-2 steam generator model condensation power in the event of the beyond design basis accident. Proceedings of International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants 2010, ICAPP 2010. San Diego, CA, 2010, pp. 186-192.
19. Grigoriev M.M., Plakseev A.A., Podporina N.A. Power characteristics of the system of passive heat removal of VVER-1000, depending on the parameters of the medium in the steam generator. Proceedings of the 6-th International seminar on horizontal steam generators, Podolsk, 2006 (in Russian).
20. Kopytov I.I., Kalyakin S.G., Berkovich V.M., Morozov A.V., Remizov O.V. Experimental investigation of non-condensable gases effect on Novovoronezh NPP-2 steam generator condensation power under the condition of passive safety systems operation. Proceedings of the 17-th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering 2009, ICONE17. Brussels, 2009, pp. 735-743.
21. Kalyakin S.G., Remizov O.V., Morozov A.V., Yuriev Y.U., Klimanova Y.U. Substantiation of project features of GE-2 passive flooding system of advanced nuclear power plants project with VVER. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2003, no. 2, pp. 94-101 (in Russian).