+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2017-01"
issue_name="2017 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/01/07.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="82"
udc="541.13+11"
title="Computer modeling of thermal processes with calcium, strontium and cesium radionuclides when radioactive graphite is heated in the carbon dioxide atmosphere"
original_title="Компьютерное моделирование термических процессов с участием радионуклидов кальция, стронция и цезия при нагреве радиоактивного графита в атмосфере углекислого газа"
authors=["BarbinNM", "SidashIA", "TerentievDI", "AlekseyevSG"]
tags=["thermodynamic modeling", "thermal processes", "equilibrium constant", "radionuclides", "radioactive graphite", "heat", "carbon dioxide"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.07"

+++

Nuclear power plants are one of the main sources of power generation. In designing nuclear reactors, no technical solutions for decommissioning were provided, nor were there safe technologies of handling irradiated reactor graphite. Decommissioning of uraniumgraphite reactors represents a complex of difficult tasks connected with the choice of optimum ways and methods for handling radioactive graphite. Computer modeling of reactor graphite processing by heating in carbon dioxide makes it possible to determine the behavior of radioactive elements. Using computer modeling, the behavior of Ca, Sr and Cs was studied when the radioactive graphite was heated in the carbon dioxide atmosphere. It is found that calcium is present as vapors (Ca, CaO, CaCl, CaCl2), ions (Ca+, CaO+) and condensed forms (CaCO3, CaCl2, CaO). Strontium is present as vapors (Sr, SrO, SrCl, SrCl2), ions (Sr+, SrO+) and condensed forms (SrCl2, SrCO3, SrO). Cesium is present as vapors (Cs, CsCl), ions (Cs) and a condensed form (CsCl2). The main reactions are identified and their equilibrium constants are determined. The obtained data show that, at temperatures of 573 to 973 K, vapors of calcium, strontium and cesium chlorides are generated. A temperature increase to 1373 K leads to the thermal ionization of cesium chloride and formation of ionized cesium. A temperature increase to 2273 K results in the thermal ionization of strontium and cesium and formation of ionized calcium and strontium.

### References

1. Blinova I.V., Sokolov I.D. Obrashcheniye s radioaktivnymi grafitovymi otkhodami [Radioactive graphite waste]. Atomnaya tekhnika za rubezhom, 2012, no. 6, pp. 3–14 (in Russian).
2. Tsyganov А.А., Khvostov V.I., Komarov Е.А., Kotlyarevskiy S.G., Pavlyuk А.О., Shamanin I.V., Nesterov V.N. Problemy utilizatsii reaktornogo grafita ostavlennykh promyshlennykh uran-grafitovykh reaktorov [The problems of utilizing graphite of stopped graphite-uranium reactors]. Izvestiya Tomskogo Politekhnicheskogo Universiteta, 2007, no. 2, pp. 88–92 (in Russian).
3. Romenkov A.A., Yarmolenko O.A., Andreyeva L.A., Yermoshin F.E., Tuktarov M.A., Semenikhin V.I., Ufayev N.N. Vyvod iz ekspluatatsii yadernykh i radiatsionnoopasnykh obyektov, obrashcheniye s otrabotavshym yadernym toplivom i radioaktivnymi otkhodami [Decommissioning of nuclear and radiation hazardous objects, handling of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste]. Atomnaya energiya, 2006, no. 5, pp. 372–379 (in Russian).
4. Romenkov A.A., Tuktarov M.A., Pyshkin V.P. Besplamennoye szhiganiye RAO v rasplave soley [Flameless combustion of waste in salt melt]. Bezopasnost’ okruzhayuschey sredy, 2006, no. 3, pp.50–65 (in Russian).
5. Skachek M.A. Obrashcheniye s otrabotannym yadernym toplivom i radioaktivnymi otkhodami AES [Handling of NPP spent nuclear fuel and radioactive nuclear waste]. Moscow, Izdatelskiy dom MEI Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
6. Barbin N.M., Peshkov A.V. Otsenka povedeniya radionuklidov pri gorenii radioaktivnogo grafita. Bezopasnost kriticheskikh infrastruktur i territoriy [Evaluation of the behavior of radionuclides during burning of radioactive graphite. Security of critical infrastructures and territories] Proc. of the 2nd All6Russian Conf. and 12th School of Young Scientists. Ekaterinburg. Ural branch of RAS Publ., 2013, p. 67 (in Russian).
7. Barbin N.M., Terentyev D.I., Peshkov A.V., Alekseyev S.G. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye povedeniya radionuklidov pri nagreve (szhiganii) radioaktivnogo grafita v atmosfere vozdukha [Thermodynamic modeling of radionuclide behavior during heating (burning) of radioactive graphite in the air atmosphere]. Pozharovzryvobezopasnost’, 2014, no. 3, pp. 58–67 (in Russian).
8. Vatolin N.A., Moiseyev G.K., Trusov B.G. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye v vysokotemperaturnykh neorganicheskikh sistemakh [Thermodynamic modeling in High Temperature inorganic systems]. Moscow. Metallurgy Publ., 1994 (in Russian).
9. Barbin N.M., Alekseyev S.G., Alekseyev K.S. Primeneniye termodinamicheskogo modelirovaniya dlya izucheniya polimerov pri nagrevanii [Application of thermodynamic modeling for studying of polymers at heating]. Izvestiya Yuzhnogo Federalnogo Universiteta. Tehnicheskie nauki, 2013, v. 145, no. 8, pp. 245–247 (in Russian).
10. Terentyev D.I., Barbin N.M., Borisenko A.V., Alekseyev S.G. Termodinamicheskoye issledovaniye sostava gazovoy fazy nad rasplavami sistemy Pb + Bi [Thermodynamic study of the composition of the gas phase above the melts of the Pb + Bi system]. Perspektivnye materialy, 2011, no. 13, pp. 858–864 (in Russian).
11. Terentyev D.I., Barbin N.M., Borisenko A.V., Alekseyev S.G. Sostav i teplofizicheskiye svoystva sistemy (Pb-Bi) - par pri razlichnykh usloviyakh [Composition and thermophysical properties of the (Pb+Bi) melt - vapor systems at various conditions]. Prikladnaya fizika, 2012, no. 3, p. 23 (in Russian).
12. Barbin N. M., Terentiev D. I., Alekseyev S.G. Computer calculations for thermal behavior of Na2 CO3-Li2 CO3 melt. Journal of Engineering Thermophysics, 2011, v. 20, no. 3, pp. 308–314.
13. Terentyev D.I., Barbin N.M., BorisenkoA.V., Alekseev S.G. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye ispareniya rasplavov Pb + Bi pri razlichnykh davleniyakh [Thermodynamic simulation of vaporization of Pb +Bi melts at different pressures]. Himicheskaya fizika i mezoskopiya, 2011, v. 13, no. 3, p. 350 (in Russian).
14. Barbin N.M. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye termicheskogo povedeniya rasplavov Li2CO3+ Na2CO3 i CaCO3 + Na2CO3 [Thermodynamic modeling of the thermal behavior of melts Li2CO3+ Na2CO3 and CaCO3+ Na2CO3]. Himicheskaya fizika i mezoskopiya, 2008, v. 10, no. 3, pp. 354–360 (in Russian).
15. Barbin N.M., Tikina I.V., Terentyev D.I., Alekseyev S.G. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye parovoy fazy pri isparenii rasplavlennogo splava Vuda pri razlichnykh davleniyakh [Thermodynamic modeling of a vapor phase at evaporation of the Wood alloy at various pressures]. Prikladnaya fizika, 2014, no. 3, pp. 12–16 (in Russian).
16. Barbin N.M., Ovchinikova I.V., Terentyev D.I., Alekseyev S.G. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye termicheskikh protsessov, proiskhodyaschikh v rasplavlennom splave Vuda pri razlichnykh usloviyakh [Thermodynamic modeling thermal processes of the Wood alloy in various conditions]. Prikladnaya fizika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 8–11 (in Russian).
17. Bazhenov V.A., Buldakov L.A., Vasilenko I.Ya. Vrednye knimicheskiye veschestva. Radioaktivnye veschesvta [Harmful chemical substances. Radioactive substances]. Leningrad. Himiya Publ., 1990 (in Russian).
18. Belov G.V., Trusov B.G. Termodinamicheskoye modelirovaniye khimicheski reagiruyuschikh sistem [Thermodynamic modeling of chemically reacting systems]. Moscow. Bauman MSTU Publ., 2013 (in Russian).