+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2017-01"
issue_name="2017 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="pdf/2017/01/2017-01-article-10.pdf"
first_page="107"
last_page="115"
udc="53.043, 53.044"
title="A study of the ionizing radiation impact on lindane and the active substance of «hexachlorane dust» chemical"
original_title="Исследование последствий радиационного воздействия на линдан и действующее вещество препарата «гексахлоран дуст»"
authors=["PolyakovaLP", "MelnikovaTV", "LukyanovaNN"]
tags=["organochlorinated pesticide", "radiation stability", "degradation degree", "isomers: γ-HCH", "α-HCH", "β-HCH", "lindane", "pesticidal chemical", "hexachlorane dust", "γ -irradiation dose", "dose rate", "radiation destruction", "stereo isomerization"]
rubric = "applicationofnucleartech"
rubric_name = "Application of nuclear tech"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.10"

+++

The article discusses the development of optimal conditions for radiation destruction of organochlorine pesticide, hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH), which is the main active ingredient of the chemical «hexachlorane dust». The pesticide decomposition is investigated in order to study the advanced radiation technologies that will be useful forrecycling process of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) included in the list approved by the Stockholm Convention in 2001. The radiation stability of one of thehexachlorocyclohexane isomer, γ-HCH, which is in the State standard sample of lindane and the pesticidal chemical was compared when they were irradiated in a dose of 117 kGy by γ-rays (dose rate was 0.28 Gy/s). A slight decrease was discovered in the degradation degree of γ-HCH which is a part of the pesticidal chemical as compared to the lindane degradation degree. It was suggested that one of the reasons of the observed effect was the bond strength of the organochlorine substances with the mineral filler of the chemical. This bond is provided by the initial adsorption and affects the mobility of the active particles formed by irradiation of the samples by γ-rays. It is shown that the established difference has no practical value. Thus, the development of optimal conditions for the pesticide destruction involving the radiation factor is quite possible. It is confirmed by the example of complex heterogeneous systems. Radiochemical transformations of the organochlorine pesticide were discussed with the involvement of dechlorination and stereoisomerization mechanisms. The obtained data give evidence of not only destruction process but also possible HCH molecules transformation after their irradiation. It has been shown that after the radiation exposure, γ-HCH is the least stable isomer and its transformation to α- and β- isomers is possible. Spatial structural changes in γ-HCH molecules and its isomers under the action of gamma rays can be explained by such redistribution of Cl atoms relative to the hydrocarbon cycle, which provides the most energetically stable state of the molecule.

### References

1. Melnikova T.V., Polyakova L.P., Kozmin G.V., Nikulkina Yu.I., Glushkov Yu.M. Study of the Stability of Organochlorine Compounds in a Pesticide Preparation Irradiated by Gamma Radiation. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring [Nuclear Physics and Engineering], 2011, v. 2, no. 4, pp. 370–374 (in Russian).
2. Polyakova L.P., Melnikova T.V., Kozmin G.V., Lukyanova N.N., Glushkov Yu.M. Methodological Aspects of Radiation Treatment of Pesticide Preparations for the Purposes of Their Waste Utilization. Mezhdunarodnyy zhurnal prikladnykh i fundamentalnykh issledovaniy [International Journal of Applied and Fundamental Research], 2014, no. 11, pp. 210–215 (in Russian).
3. Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. Available at: http://online.lexpro.ru/document/23232517
4. Radiation technologies in agriculture and food industry. Ed. Kozmin G.V., Sanzharova N.I. Kozmin G.V., Geraskin S.A. Obninsk. VNIIRAE Publ., 2015, pp. 343–344 (in Russian).
5. Duarte C.L, Mori M.N., Kodama Y., Oikawa H., Sampa M.H.O. Decontamination of pesticide packing using ionizing radiation. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2007, v. 76, pp. 1885–1889.
6. Melnikova T.V., Nikulkina Yu.I., Polyakova L.P. Identification and quantification of the active substance in the technical mixture (depersonalized pesticide a preparation). Proceedings of the 7th Regional Science Conference. Ed. G.V. Kozmin. Obninsk, IATE Publ., 2010, Part 1, pp. 39–44 (in Russian).
7. Lindan (gamma-HCH) – National standard sample (NSS 7889-2001). International Valuation Standards (IVS 1134-2005). Available at: http://www.pchk.ru/shop/UID_3172.html.
8. Mohamed K.A., Basfar A.A., Al-Kahtani H.A. Radiolytic degradation of malathion and lindane in aqueous solutions. Radiation Physics and Chemistry. 2009, v. 78, no. 11, pp. 994–1000.
9. Parlar H., Kotzas D. Degradation in the Liquid and Adsorbed Phase. In: Appraisal of Tests to Predict the Environmental Behaviour of Chemicals. SCOPE 25. John Wiley and Sons. NY. 1985. H.A., pp. 81–105.
10. Melnikova T.V. Radiation chemical transformations of trace organochlorinated pesticides in solutions and foodstuff. Cand. Sci. (Chemistry) thesis, 27.10.2005. Moscow, 2005, 177 p. (in Russian).
11. Melnikova T.V., Polyakova L.P., Kozmin G.V. Stability of Organochlotinated Pesticides in Model Solutions under Effect of g-Irradiation. Radiatsionnaya Biologiya i Radioekologiya [Radiation Biology and Radioecology], 2001, v. 41, no. 6, pp. 683–687 (in Russian).
12. Phillips TM., Seech AG., Lee H., Trevors J.T. Biodegradation of Hexachloocyclohexane Environmental Toxicology and Chemistryro-cyclohexane (HCH) by microorganisms. Biodegradation., 2005, no. 16, pp. 363–392.
13. Hamada M., Kawano E., Kawamura S, Shiro M. Radiation- and photo-induced degradation of five isomers of 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachlorocyclohexane. J. Agric. Biol. Chem., 1981, v. 45, no. 3, pp. 659–665.
14. Galiulin R.V., Galiulina P.L. Cartographic evaluation of the isomers-HCH status in soils agrolandscapes Mugan-Salyan array (Azerbaijan). Agrohimiya [Agrochemistry], 1996, no. 8– 9, pp. 97–102 (in Russian).
15. Baumann K., Angerer J., Heinrich R., Lehnert G: Occupational exposure to hexachlorocyclohexane. Body burden of HCH isomers. Int Arch Occup Environ Health., 1980, v. 47, no. 2, pp. 119–127.
16. Fedorov L.A., Yablokov A.V. Pestitsidy – tojsicheskiy udar po biosfere i cheloveku [Pesticides – toxic attack on the biosphere and man]. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1999. 462 p. (in Russian).
17. Pikaev A.K. Solvatirovannyy electron v radiatsionnoy khimii [Solvated electrons in the radiation chemistry]. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1969. 457 p. (in Russian).
18. Pikaev A.K. Sovremennaya radiatsionnaya khimiya. Radioliz gazov i zhidkostey [Modern Radiation Chemistry. The radiolysis of gases and liquids]. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1986, 440 p. (in Russian).
19. Pikaev A.K. Contribution of radiation technology to environmental protection. Khimiya vysokikh energy [Chemistry of High Energies], 2002, v. 36, no. 3, pp. 163–175 (in Russian).
20. Yershov B.G. Radiation technologies: opportunities, state and the application prospects. Vestnik Rossiyskoy akademii nauk [Bulletin of the Russian Academy of Sciences] 2013, v. 83, no. 10, pp. 885–895 (in Russian).