+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2017-02"
issue_name="2017 - #02"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="pdf/2017/01/2017-01-article-11.pdf"
first_page="116"
last_page="126"
udc="661.879:541.183"
title="Sorption of cations the heavy metals and radionuclides from the aqueous medium with new synthetic zeolite-similar sorbent"
original_title="Сорбция катионов тяжелых металлов и радионуклидов из водных сред новым синтетическим цеолитоподобным сорбентом"
authors=["ShilinaAS", "BakhtinVD", "BurukhinSB", "AskhadullinSR"]
tags=["sorption", "adsorbent", "radionuclides", "cesium", "strontium", "sorption capacity", "heavy metals", "water treatment", "recycling"]
rubric = "applicationofnucleartech"
rubric_name = "Application of nuclear tech"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.11"

+++

For the control and treatment of water environments on nuclear atomic plants are used the expensive traditional sorption materials. This article related on the synthetic aluminosilicate zeolite-similar adsorbent which have ability to effectively purify water from nuclear power plant and other enterprises nuclear industrial complex. Of particular importance are the properties of the sorbent, such as thermal, radiation and chemical resistance that allow to clean hot water at the plant without it pre-cooling. Sorbent is synthesized from inexpensive raw materials which produced by the domestic industry, production is not associated with significant energy costs and realized in a single technological process step. The resulting product has a high specific surface ~ 1000 m2/g, high thermal and chemical resistance: withstands temperatures up to 650°С with maintain their physicochemical and sorption properties, is resistant to aggressive media, radiation dose from 5 to 10 MG no effect on its structure and sorption capability. The sorbent shows high propensity for sorption of cations of heavy metals and radionuclides. Sorption capacity in mg/g up to: Ni2+ – 140, Cu2+ – 160, Fe3+ – 560, Cr3+ – 110, Cs+ – 2000, Sr2+ – 226. Purification factor for 137Сs from solutions of liquid radioactive waste is 2.6. Possible mechanism of spent sorbent utilization – is exposing it for 2 – 3 hours at a temperature from 700 to 800°C. After that this material is highly compacted, changes the bulk densities of from 0.2 g/cm3 to 2.5 g/cm3. Simultaneously, take place melt material and closing pores. It’s supposed that new sorbent can be used at all enterprises which process of production is used complex water purification.

### References

1. Roschektaev B.M. Water chemistry regime NPP with VVER-1000 and RBMK-1000. Textbook. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2010, 132 p. (in Russian).
2. Myasoedova G.V. Rossijskij khimicheskij zhurnal. 2005, v. 49, № 2, p. 72-75 (in Russian).
3. Korostelev D.P. Processing at the plant of radioactive waters and gases. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ, 1988, 152 p. (in Russian).
4. Myasoedova G.V., Nikashina V.A. Absorbent materials for extracting radionuclides from aqueous media. Rossijskij khimicheskij zhurnal. 2006, v. 50, no. 5, pp. 55-61 (in Russian).
5. Molochnikova N.P., Myasoedova G.V., Tananaev I.G. Absorbent materials. Radiokhimiya. 2003, v. 45, no. 6, pp. 546-548 (in Russian).
6. Milutin V.V., Gelis V.M., Ershov B.G., Seliverstov A.F. The influence of organic complexing and surfactants on coprecipitation of cesium radionuclides with nickel ferrocyanide precipitate. Radiokhimiya. 2008, v. 50, no. 1, pp 60-61 (in Russian).
7. Milutin V.V., Gelis V.M. Determination of the optimal conditions for the co-precipitation of cesium radionuclides with nickel ferrocyanide precipitate. Radiokhimiya, 2008, v. 50, no. 1, pp. 57-59 (in Russian).
8. Gelis V.M., Chuveleva E.A., Maslov G.B., Firsov L.A., Milutin V.V. Kharitonov O.V. Kudryavtseva S.P., Kozlitin E.A. Modern Sorption-chromatographic methods extraction and separation of radionuclides. In: Modern Problems of Physical Chemistry. Moscow. Granitsa Publ., 2005, pp.633-650 (in Russian).
9. Milutin V.V. Fiziko-chemical methods of extraction of radionuclides from liquid radioactive waste of low and intermediate level. Diss. Dr. Sci. (Chemistry). Moscow, 2008 (in Russian).
10. Kokotov J.A., Zolotarev P.P., Elkin G.E. Theoretical bases of ion exchange. Leningrad. Khimiya Publ., 1986, 280 p. (in Russian).
11. Milutin V.V., Gelis V.M., Nekrasov N.A. Sorption radionuclides Cs, Sr, U and Pu on natural and modified clays. Radiokhimiya, 2012, v. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-74 (in Russian).
12. Milinchuk V.K., Shilina A.S. A method for producing aluminosilicate adsorbent. Russian patent for the invention № 2402486. Bul. № 30, 2010 (in Russian).
13. Shilina A.S., Milinchuk V.K. Sorption properties of a new type of silica-alumina sorbent. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2008, no. 3, p. 24-30 (in Russian).
14. Shilina A.S., Milinchuk V.K. Study of sorption properties of heat-resistant silica-alumina sorbent. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2009, no. 3, pp. 58-65 (in Russian).
15. Shilina A.S., Milinchuk V.K. Sorption purification of natural and industrial waters from cations of heavy metals and radionuclides a new type of high temperature aluminosilicate adsorbent. Sorbcionnye i hromotograficheskie processy. 2010, v. 10, iss. 2, pp. 237-245 (in Russian).
16. Gel’fman M.I., Kavalevich O.V. Yustratov V.P.Colloid chemistry. St. Petersburg. Lan’ Publ., 2003, 336 p. (in Russian).
17. Fadeev V.I., Shekhovtsov T.N., Ivanov V.M. Fundamentals of Analytical Chemistry. How to: Proc. allowance for vuzov. Ed. Yu. A. Zolotov. Moscow. Vysshaya shkola Publ., 2001, 463 p. (in Russian).
18. Lidin R.A. Inorganic chemistry reactions. Handbook, Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 2007, 350 p. (in Russian).
19. Breck D. Zeolite molecular sieves. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1976, 781 p. (in Russian).
20. Kubasov A.A. Zeolites is boiling stones. Sarovskij obozrevatel’nyj zhurnal. 1996, no. 7, pp.70 -76 (in Russian).