+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2017-01"
issue_name="2017 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="/pdf/2017/01/2017-01-article-12.pdf"
first_page="127"
last_page="137"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Development of the structured relational database for civil plutonium in Russia and its implementation "
original_title="Разработка базы данных гражданского плутония России и ее применение"
authors=["PshakinGM", "MoseevPA", "KorobeynikovVV", "MoseevAL"]
tags=["closed fuel cycle", "nuclear fuel", "nuclear materials control and accounting", "plutonium", "minor actinides", "hardware and software", "input and output data", "compatibility with material control and accounting system", "system for management of specialized data base of plutonium"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.12"

+++

As of the present moment enormous amounts plutonium were accumulated during the period of development of the Soviet (Russia) nuclear program in spent fuel of reactors of different types – power, research and mobile. Issues associated with future fate of the accumulated plutonium (and plutonium which is currently being accumulated) such as long-term storage, burial or subsequent use as reactor fuel with closing nuclear fuel cycle, require exact knowledge about the places where plutonium is stored, its quantities and conditions at any required time moment. Existing nuclear material control and accounting system does not allow obtaining the required information. The present study is dedicated to the examination of further development of the structured relational database for civil plutonium in Russia (SRDBCP) development of which was initiated in 2013 and which would allow preparing input data for implementation of systems analytical studies for substantiating the decision taken on the future use of civil plutonium in Russia. The first priority task of the present study is the possibility of selection of technological batches of extracted plutonium for manufacturing BN-800, BREST and BN-1200 fast reactor core loads. At the same time the SRDBCP can be used as well for addressing wider scope of problems associated with substantiation of closed nuclear fuel cycle. Co-operation with such powerful software complexes as CYCLE will allow performing high-accuracy calculations from a single workplace and within compressed timeframe.

Computer mechanisms for processing and transformation of data, mechanisms of interaction with computational software complexes (CYCLE) – preparation of input data for calculations of scenarios of development of nuclear power generation in Russia and in the world based on thermal and fast nuclear reactors, including for closing the nuclear fuel cycle were developed as the result of continued work with SRDBCP.

### References

1. Russian declaration in the IAEA published as INFCIRC 549/Add.9/17 document, IAEA, Vienna, 25/09/2015.
2. Strategy of development of nuclear power generation in Russia during the first half of the XXI century. Main provisions. Moscow. Minatom Rossii Publ., 2000 (in Russian).
3. [Strategy of development of nuclear power generation in Russia during the first half of the XXI century. Main provisions. Illustration of main provisions. Moscow. CNIIAtomInform Publ., 2001 (in Russian).
4. New generation of nuclear power production technologies for the period of 2010-2015 and until 2020: Federal Target Program. Approved by the Resolution of the Government of the RF No. 50. Dated Feb. 3, 2010 (in Russian).
5. Basic Rules of Nuclear Materials Accounting and Control. OPUK, NP-030-12, 2012 (in Russian).
6. Shidlovsky V.V., Glagolenko Ju.V., Dzekun E.G., Rovny S.I., Ufimtsev V.P., Bobylev A.I., Prishchepov A.I., Broshevitsky V.S. Status and problems of accumulation and use of civil plutonium. Materials for the Seventh Annula International Political Forum on Nuclear Materials. Moscow, 2000 (in Russian).
7. Kalashnikov A.G., Moseev A.L., Dekusar V.M., Korobeynikov V.V., Moseev P.A. Evolution of the CYCLE code for the systems analysis of the nuclear fuel cycle. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2016, no.1, pp. 91-99 (in Russian).
8. Korobeynikov V.V. Moseev P.A., Pshakin G.M., Skupov M.V., Glushenkov A.E. Rogozhkin V.Yu. Development of the structured relational database for civil plutonium in Russia. VANT. Ser. Fizika yadernyh reaktorov, 2015, iss. 5, pp. 108-114 (in Russian).
9. Moseev P.A. Korobeynikov V.V., Pshakin G.M. The Database for Civil Plutonium in Russia. Scientific session of NRNU MEPhI-2015. Book of abstracts. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Pibl., 2015, v. 3, p. 327 (in Russian).
10. Moseev P.A., Korobeynikov V.V., Moseev A.L. Optimization of Plutonium Inventories for a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle with Thermal and Fast Nuclear Reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 2, pp. 123-132 (in Russian).
11. Pshakin G.M., Korobeynikov V.V., Moseev P.A. Handling plutonium in the closed fuel cycle. Problems and proposals on their solution. Forum «Neutronics and thermal physics problems of nuclear energy». XXVI Interdepartmental workshop «Neutronics problems of nuclear energy (Neutronics-2015)». Book of abstracts. Obninsk. GNC RF-FEI Publ., 2015 (in Russian).
12. Pshakin G.M., Korobeynikov V.V., Moseev P.A. Development of the Structured Relational Database for Civil Plutonium in Russia». 56-th International Conference INMM-2015, USA.
13. Egorov A.F., Kalashnikov A.G., Moseev P.A., Korobeynikov V.V. Comparative Analysis of Simulation Calculations of Nuclear Power Generation in Russia Using CYCLE and MESSAGE Software Complexes. VANT. Ser. Physics of Nuclear Reactors, 2013, iss. 2, pp. 37-45 (in Russian).
14. Pshakin G., Ryazanov B., Kilmartin W., Dickman D., Codman G., Kelly G. Software for MC&A; Standard and Modeling Means for Enhancing MC&A System Management. INMM, 2002.
15. Pshakin G. Russia-USA Agreement on Utilization of Plutonium Recognized as Excessive for Weapons Purposes – Alternatives and Future. Yadernyj Control’, 2016, v. 477, no. 4, pp. 32-38 (in Russian).
16. Zrodnikov A.V. Pshakin G.M. Voropaev A.I. Russian-American Cooperation in the Development of Russian Plutonium Registry. 43-th INMM Annual Conference, paper 179, US Orlando, 2002.