+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2017-01"
issue_name="2017 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="13"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/01/13.pdf"
first_page="138"
last_page="146"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental researches of dependences of lead coolant axial pumping on the lattice parameters of impellers profiles"
original_title="Экспериментальные исследования зависимостей характеристик осевых насосов, перекачивающих свинцовый теплоноситель, от параметров решеток профилей рабочих колес"
authors=["BeznosovAV", "LvovAV", "BokovPA", "BokovaTA", "RazinVA"]
tags=["heavy liquid metal coolant", "reactor plant on fast neutrons", "RCP (reactor coolant pump)", "pump impeller", "pump head", "axial pump", "lead coolant", "pump flow"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.13"

+++

The paper presents the results of experimental researches of dependences of axial pump characteristics (flow, pressure and efficiency) in the lead coolant on the lattice parameters of impellers profiles, including the number of blades, the installation angle of the profile in the lattice and lattice density.

The researches were carried out as applied to the conditions of low and medium power fast neutron reactors cooled by lead-cooled horizontal steam generators (FRL HSG). Engineering solutions of such facilities are worked out at the Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University (NNSTU).

The experiments were carried out on the FT-4 NNSTU test-bench (facility) at 440–500°C of lead coolant. The number of blades in the form of flat plates during the research process was 3, 4, 6, and 8; the installation angle of the blades in the lattice was varied from 9 to 43°; lattice density (0.6–1.2) was modified by means of changing the chord length of the blade profile. Rotation speed of the pump PLA-01 NNSTU, on which changeable impellers have been installed, was varied in steps of 100 r/m from 600 to 1100 r/m. The diameter of blades was about 200 mm, the maximum lead coolant flow in the researches was about 2000 t/h. The characteristics of twenty seven changeable impellers were investigated. The goal of the present study was to determine the characteristics of the pump (feed pressure and efficiency) installed in the circulation circuit with lead coolant depending on the parameters of grating profiles: setting angle of the blades in the profile (α), the number of blades (Z), density arrays (l/t) when a step change the pump shaft rotational speed (n). Further, it is expected to conduct similar studies on the experimental determination of the optimum performance of the rectifying unit.

The obtained results are recommended for use in the design of axial pumps pumped HLMC.

### References

1. Beznosov A.V. Bokova T.A, Bokov P.A, Tehnologii i osnovnoye oborudovaniye konturov reaktornykh ustanovok, promyshlennykh i issledovatelskih stendov so svintsovym i svinets4vismutovym teplonositelyami [Technology and basic equipment for reactor installations loops, industrial and research facilities with lead and lead-bismuth coolant]. Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University. Nizhny Novgorod. Litera Publ., 2016, 488 p. (in Russian).
2. Beznosov A.V., Lvov A.V., Bokov P.A., Bokova TA, Shikhov A.I. Experimental research and elaboration of characteristics of lead coolant pumps. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika . 2015, no. 4, pp. 123–132 (in Russian).
3. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A. Oborudovaniye energeticheskikh konturov s tyazhyolymi zhidkometallicheskimi teplonositelyami v atomnoy energetike [Equipment for power loops with heavy metal coolants in nuclear energy]. Nizhny Novgorod. Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University Publ., 2012. 536 p. (in Russian).
4. Lomakin A.A. Tsentrobezhnye i osevye nasosy [Centrifugal and axial pumps]. Moscow-Leningrad. Mashinostroyeniye Publ., 1966. 364 p. (in Russian).
5. Beznosov A.V. Molodtsov A.A., Nazarov A.V. The pump for supplying liquid metal coolant. Patent RF no. 2284425, 2006 (in Russian).
6. Beznosov A.V. Molodtsov A.A., Nazarov A.V. The pump for supplying liquid metal coolant. Patent RF no. 2002125122, 2004 (in Russian).
7. Budov V.M., Nasosy AES [NPP pumps]. Textbook for High Schools. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986. 408 p. (in Russian).
8. Stepanov A.I. Tsentrobezhnye i osevye nasosy [Centrifugal and axial pumps]. Moscow. Mashgiz Publ., 1960. 462 p. (in Russian).
9. Sukhanov D.Y. Rabota lopastnykh nasosov na vyazkikh zhidkostyakh [Operation of vane pumps on viscous fluids]. Moscow. Mashgiz Publ., 1952. 33 p. (in Russian).
10. Abdurashitov S.A. Nasosy i kompressory [Pumps and compressors]. Moscow. Nedra Publ., 1974. 296 p. (in Russian).
11. Zimnitsky V.A. Lopastnye nasosy: Spravochnik [Vane pumps: reference book]. Leningrad. Mashinostroyeniye Publ., 1986. 334 p. (in Russian).
12. Pevzner B.M. Nasosy sudovykh ustanovok i sistem [Pumps of marine facilities and systems]. Leningrad. Sudostroyeniye Publ., 1971, 384 p. (in Russian).
13. Chinyiaev I.A. Lopastnye nasosy: Spravochnoye posobiye [Vane pumps: reference guide]. Leningrad, Mashinostroyeniye Publ., 1973, 184 p. (in Russian).
14. Robozhev A.V. Nasosy dlya atomnykh elektricheskikh stantsiy [Pumps for nuclear power plants]. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1979, 245 p. (in Russian).
15. Kiselev I.I. Krupnye osevye i tsentrobezhnye nasosy. Montazh, ekspluatatsiya i remont: Spravochnoye posobie [Large axial and centrifugal pumps. Installation, maintenance and repair: reference guide]. Moscow. Mashinostroyenie Publ., 1977, 184 p. (in Russian).
16. Pfeyderer K. Lopatochnye mashiny dlya zhidkosti i gaza [Impeller machines for fluid and gas]. Moscow. Mashgiz Publ., 1960 (in Russian).
17. Mitenkov F.M. Glavnye tsirkulyatsionnye nasosy AES [NPP main circulation pumps]. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 376 p. (in Russian).
18. Yaremenko O.V. Ispytaniya nasosov [Pump testing]. Moscow. Mashinostroyeniye Publ., 1976 (in Russian).
19. Suvorov G.P., Bugreev M.I., Kuzko O.V. Experience of operating the 27/WT facility. Program and abstracts of the conference «The heavy liquid metal coolant in nuclear technologies. TZHMT498». Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1998 (in Russian).
20. Filatov B.V., Vasilenko V.A., Voronin V.E., Bredihin V.Ya., Andrianov A.K. Experience in operating nuclear power units with liquid metal coolant on the stand KM-1. Program and abstracts of the conference «The heavy liquid metal coolant in nuclear technologies. TZHMT498». Obninsk, 1998 (in Russian).