+++

categories="article"
date="2017-03-22T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2017-01"
issue_name="2017 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="14"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2017/01/14.pdf"
first_page="147"
last_page="155"
udc="621.039.009; 659.3"
title="Improving the general and environmental image of nuclear power industry objects"
original_title="Улучшение общего и экологического имиджа объектов атомной энергетики"
authors=["SuzdalevaAL"]
tags=["nuclear power industry", "stereotype", "implicit memory", "psychological frustration", "psychological deprivation", "active and passive imagemaking"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.1.14"

+++

The aim of the publication is to introduce a wide range of experts with effective ways to improve the image of the objects of the Russian nuclear power industry. Negative attitude towards them is not determined by their real danger. The main factor, which defines the public opinion, has become the dissemination of biased information about the Chernobyl accident. As a result, a stable psychological association of nuclear power plants and radioactive pollutions of the environment was formed. The negative stereotype of nuclear power plants as high-risk objects for people and the environment has arisen in people minds (environmental fear). For this reason, the environmental image of these objects is the most important part of their overall image. For the successful development of nuclear energy this issue needs to be given increased attention. The establishment of common and positive environmental image will improve public opinion about nuclear facilities in the country and will be an important factor in boosting the competitiveness of Russian projects in the international market. Passive-information opposition of supporters and opponents of nuclear power development is proposed to replace at the active measures to destroy negative stereotypes in mass consciousness. This requires an analysis of the real needs of people and the degree of their satisfaction (frustrations and deprivations). The task of the active imagemaking is the formation in individuals of psychological installation of the importance of nuclear power as a factor in the improvement of their lives. The ways of practical application of the methods of active imagemaking were offered. It was recommended to conduct a comprehensive analysis of massive frustrations and deprivations of the population simultaneously in relation to the moral, economic and environmental aspects of public life. It was concluded about the necessity for government involvement in improving the image of nuclear power facilities.

### References

1. Lessons from Fukushima and Chernobyl for U.S. public health. Physicians for Social Responsibility: Briefing Book. Washington, Spring, 2011. 24 р.
2. Comparative analysis of Responses after Chernobyl and Fukushima. Nuclear Monitor: North American Edition, 2012, no. 743, pp. 3-7.
3. Mamun M.Recent Fukushima nuclear detonation, Chernobyl nuclear fallout, Three Mile Island nuclear accident and atomic bomb explosion – rethinking the effects of nuclear radiations over human health. Int. J. Radiat. Res., 2013, no. 11, iss. 2, pp. 63-80.
4. Weart S.R. Images of nuclear energy: why people feel the way they do? IAEA Bulletin, 1991, no 3, pp. 30-36.
5. Christodouleas J.P., Forrest R.D., Ainsley C.G., Tochner Z., Hahn S.M., Glatstein E. Short-term and long-term health risks of nuclear power plant accidents. New Eng. J. Med., 2011, no. 364, pp. 2334-2341.
6. Lelieveld J., Kunkel D., Lawrence M.G. Global risk of radioactive fallout after major nuclear reactor accidents. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2012, no. 12, pp. 4245-4250.
7. Beznosov V.N., Rodionov V.B., Suzdaleva A.L. Formation of environmental images of industrial objects . Ekologiya proizvodstva, 2007, no. 1, iss. 30, pp. 22-26 (in Russian).
8. Anspaugh L.R., Catlin R J., Goldman M. The global impact of the Chernobyl reactor accident. Science, 1988, no. 242, pp. 1513-1519.
9. Smith J.T., Beresford N.A. Chernobyl – Catastrophe and Consequences. Berlin: Springer,
2005. 310 р.
10. Ehkologicheskie problemy atomnyh ehlektrostancij [Ecological problems of nuclear power plants]. Available at: http://mirznanii.com/a/328782/ekologicheskie-problemy-atomnykh-elektrostantsiy/ (accessed 5 Feb. 2017) (in Russian).
11. Suzdaleva A.L. Ecological frustration and deprivation as the basis perception of environmental conditions by the population of urban areas. Ehkologiya Urbanizirovannyh Territorij, 2015, no 3, pp. 12-17 (in Russian).
12. Hilgard E.R., Atkinson R.C. Introduction to psychology. N.Y.; Chicago: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1967. 686 p.
13. Suzdaleva A.L. Formirovanie ehkologicheskogo imidzha proizvodstvennoj organizacii i ee produkcii [The formation of the environmental image of industrial organizations and their products]. Moscow. ID ENERGIYA Publ., 2014. 416 p. (in Russian).
14. Bylkin B.K., Egorov Yu.A., Emelyanov G.A., Karaban R.T., Kirillov V.F., Nikolaevskii V.S., Suzdaleva A.L. Environmental safety of nuclear power plants... How to understand this? Izvestiya Akademii promyshlennoj ekologii, 2007, no. 2, pp. 57-62 (in Russian).
15. Boorstin D.J. The Image: A Guide to Pseudo#Events in America. N.Y.: Vintage Books, 1992. 319 p.
16. Suzdaleva A.L., Goryunova S.V. Overton windows in developing an up-to-date concept of the biosphere and in tackling the global environmental problems. Biosfera, 2015, v. 7, no. 4, pp. 429-449 (in Russian).
17. Egorov Yu.A., Nigmatulin B.I., Suzdaleva A.L., Tihomirov F.A. Estimation of ecological safety of nuclear power plants of Russia. Izvestiya Yuzhnogo Federal’nogo Universiteta. Inzhenernye nauki, 2002, no. 6, iss. 29, pp. 19-30 (in Russian).
18. Suzdaleva A.L. Sozdanie upravlyaemyh prirodno#tekhnicheskih sistem [Creation of managed natural-technical systems]. Moscow. ID ENERGIYA Publ., 2016. 160 p. (in Russian).
19. Grudakov A.A., Egorov Y.A., Kuklin V.E., Lepihov V.V., Nigmatulin B.I., Suzdaleva A.L. Nuclear Power Plants, Thermal Power Plants and the environment. Izvestiya Yuzhnogo Federal’nogo Universiteta. Inzhenernye nauki, 1999, no. 4, iss. 14, pp. 28-33 (in Russian).
20. Suzdalevа A., Goryunova S. Tekhnogenez i degradaciya poverhnostnyh vodnyh ob”ektov [Technogenesis and degradation of surface water objects]. Moscow. ID ENERGIYA Publ., 2014. 456 p. (in Russian).
21. Kozlov D.V. Suzdaleva A.L. Ecological modernization of production. Delovaya slava Rossii, 2010, no. 2, iss. 25, pp. 42-44 (in Russian).