+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-11T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2014-03"
issue_name="2014 - #03"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file="pdf/2014/03/2014-03-article-02.pdf"
first_page="15"
last_page="24"
udc="621.039"
title="Development of technology for continuous acoustic- emission monitoring of operational damageability of metal in safety-related NPP equipment"
original_title="Разработка технологии непрерывного акустико- эмиссионного мониторинга эксплуатационной повреждаемости металла ответственного оборудования атомных станций"
authors=["BakirovMB", "PovarovVP", "GromovAF", "LevchukVI"]
tags=["acousticemission method", "data base", "data collection unit", "data storage unit", "monitoring", "steam generator", "preamplifier", "thermal shock", "signal shape"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.3.02"

+++

Safe operation of NPP primary equipment whose design service life has expired requires the development of new approaches in integrity diagnostics and monitoring due to high level of metal ageing.

These approaches should be based on nondestructive testing methods which make it possible to inspect the equipment not only during the repair period, but also under operatingconditions, when the initiation and growth of dangerous defects occur. Among the modern methods of nondestructive testing, suitable for use in the operation period, the acoustic emission method demonstrates high efficiency. The article presents the results of work on the development of a multiparameter system for acoustic emission monitoring of nuclear power plant equipment damageability during power unit operation with due account of specific features of NPP control. The stages of the work with the assessment of and taking into account all influencing factors on the system under development, i.e. the need to maintain the system performance in a longterm operation at high temperature, the complex geometry of the monitored item, increased noise level, as well as the requirements for collecting and transferring the monitoring information via the Internet for operational data processing and presentation are described. A series of experiments on the debugging of the system under laboratory conditions, conducted to refine and validate the selected control methods, are described as well.

### References

1. Bakirov M.B.. Akustiko-emissionnaya diagnostika AES. Uchebnoe posobie dlya vuzov. (Acoustic emission diagnostic of NPPs. A manual for universities). Moscow, RADEKON Publ. 2003 (in Russian).
2. Nerazrushayushhij kontrol’. Spravochnik (Nondestructive testing. A handbook), v. 7. Moscow, Mashinostroenie Publ. 2006 (in Russian).
3. Improvement of in-service inspection in nuclear power plants. IAEA TECDOC - 1400. 2004.
4. Baranov V.M. Akusticheskie izmereniya v yadernoj energetike (Acoustic Measurement in nuclear power engineering). Moscow, Energotamizdat Publ. 1990 (in Russian).
5. Artyuhov V.I., Vakar K.B., Makarov V.I. Akusticheskaya emissiya i ee primenenie dlya nerazrushayushhego kontrolya v yadernoj energetike (Acoustic emission and its application for nondestructive testing in nuclear power engineering), Vakar K.V., Ed. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ. 1980 (in Russian).
6. Baranov V.M., Molodcov K.I. Akustiko-emissionnye pribory yadernoj energetiki (Acoustic emission instruments for nuclear power engineering). Moscow, Atomizdat, 1980 (in Russian).
7. Lukasevich B.I., Trunov N.B. Parogeneratory reaktornyh ustanovok VVER dlya atomnyh stancij (Steam generators for VVER nuclear power plants). Moscow, Akademkniga Publ. 2004 (in Russian).
8. Elaboration and application into practice of intelligent system of damage of NPP main equipment in the frames of PLUM Plim & Plex Eorope Wednesday 18th – Thursday 19th April 2012, Husa President Park Hotel, Brussels, Belgium.
9. Dieulesaint E., Royer D. Ondes elastiques dans les solides, Paris, Ed. Masson, 1974 (Russian edition: Uprugie volny v tverdyh telah. Moscow, Nauka Publ. 1982).
10. Ul’trazvukovye preobrazovateli dlya nerazrushayushchego kontrolya (Ultrasound transducers for nondestructive testing), Ermolov I.N., Ed. Moscow, Mashinostroenie Publ. 1986 (in PPRussian).
11. Kozinkina A.I., Tripalin A.S., Shihman V.M. P’ezoelektricheskij preobrazovatel’ dlya priema signalov akusticheskoj emissii (Piezoelectric transducers for acoustic emission signal perception). The Soviet Union, Patent, №1784095, Kl. G01 №29/04 ot 23.12.1992.
12. Tripalin A.S., Shihman V.M. Primenenie p’ezopoluprovodnikovyh materialov na osnove hal’kotengalogenidov sur’my v kachestve aktivnyh elementov preobrazovatelej. Akusticheskaya emissiya materialov i konstrukcij. Tezisy dokladov vsesoyuznoj konferencii (The application of piezosemiconductor materials on the basis of antimony chalcogenhalogenides as transducers’ active elements. Proceeding of the all-USSR conference «Acoustic emission of materials and constructions»). Rostov-on-Don, 1984 (in Russian).
13. O povyshenii dostovernosti izmereniya amplitudy akusticheskogo signala pri vysokotemperaturnom nerazrushayushchem kontrole. Tez. dokl. 9-j Vsesoyuznoj nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii «Nerazrushayushchie fizicheskie metody i sredstva kontrolya» (Improving the reliability of acoustic signal amplitude measurement at high temperature nondestructive testing. Proceeding of the all-USSR conference «Nondestructive physical methods and instruments of testing»). Minsk, 1981 (in Russian).
14. Baranov, V.M., Gritsenko, A.I., Karasevich, A.M., et al., Akusticheskaya diagnostika i kontrol’ na predpriyatiyakh toplivno/energeticheskogo kompleksa (Acoustic diagnostics and tests at fuel-processing and power generating facilities). Moscow, Nauka Publ. 1998 (in Russian).
15. Gusev O.V. Akusticheskaya emissiya pri deformirovanii monokristallov tugoplavkikh metallov (Acoustic emission under Conditions of Deformation of Single Crystals of High-Melting Metals). Moscow, Nauka Publ. 1982 (in Russian).
16. Drobot Yu.B., Lazarev A.M. Nerazrushayushchij kontrol’ ustalostnyh treshchin akustiko-emissionnym metodom (Nondestructive testing of fatigue cracks by acoustic emission method). Moscow, Izdatel’stvo standartov Publ. 1987. (in Russian)
17. Strizhalo V.A., Dobrovol’skii Yu.V., Strel’chenko V.A., Pichkova S.N., Danilina V.V. Prochnost’ i akusticheskaya emissiya materialov i elementov konstruktsii (Strength and acoustic emission of materials and structure elements). Kiev, Naukova Dumka Publ. 1990 (in Russian).
18. Bigus G.A., Borodin Yu.P., Travkin A.A. Issledovanie processov ustalosti s pomoshh’yu metoda akusticheskoj emissii (Research of fatigue process by acoustic emission method). Moscow, Mir NK, 2013, no. 1(59), pp. 17-18. (in Russian)