+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-11T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2014-03"
issue_name="2014 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="pdf/2014/03/2014-03-article-03.pdf"
first_page="25"
last_page="34"
udc="621.039.548"
title="Methodology of material testing for VVER fuel assemblies and fuel rods to support introduction of new fuel at NPPS"
original_title="Методология материаловедческих исследований ТВС и ТВЭЛОВ ВВЭР для оперативного сопровождения внедрения нового топлива на АЭС"
authors=["PavlovSV"]
tags=["fuel assembly", "fuel rod", "VVER", "irradiated fuel", "post-irradiation examinations"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.3.03"

+++

The proposed methodology for post-irradiation examination of VVER fuel assemblies (FAs) and fuel rods is to be used for effective engineering support of the introduction of new fuel at NPPs. The application of the proposed methodology allows improving the efficiency of the material testing of irradiated fuel in terms of completeness and reliability of information about the state and behavior of fuel under both normal operating conditions and under design and beyond the design-basis accidents, as well as during the transportation and long-term storage. This methodology also allows diminishing the time to get information required for introduction of new fuel at NPPs as well as reducing its cost.

In order to implement the proposed methodology, it is necessary to develop and put into the material science practice new methods and facilities to conduct examination of irradiated fuel, which are as follows: new non-destructive examination methods for fuel assemblies and fuel rods; loop facilities and capsules to conduct irradiation tests of fuel in research reactors; hot cell test facilities to subject fuel to testing under simulated emergency conditions as well as transport and long-term storage conditions; fuel inspection facilities in the NPP storage pools and research reactor pools.

Nowadays, many of the above-listed methods and NDE facilities have been developed and put into operation. They are as follows: bending stiffness test facility for VVER-1000 FAs, pulse eddy current testing of fuel claddings, measurement of fuel-to-cladding gap, ultrasonic test method for failed fuel rods, test facility intended for simulation of SNF dry storage conditions, test facilities for the VVER-1000 FA inspection and repair etc.

### References

1. Smirnov V.P. Razrabotka i sovershenstvovanie metodov i sredstv issledovavanij TVS i tvelov dlya litsenzirovaniya topliva YaEU. Diss. dokt. tekhn. nauuk v forme nauch. dokl. [Development and advancement of methods and facilities for examination of fuel assemblies and fuel elements for licensing of nuclear reactor fuel. Dr. tech. sci. diss. in the form of scientific report]. N.Novgorod, 1996. 05.14.03, 48 p. (in Russian).
2. Ivanov V.B., Basova B.G., Dvoretskij V.G., Khodyrev Yu.P. Avtomatizatsiya distantsionnyh materialovedcheskih issledovanij v goryachiih laboratoriyah [Automation of remote-controlled post-irradiation examinations in the hot cells]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1986 (in Russian).
3. Pavlov S.V., Sukhikh A.V., Sagalov S.S. Vikhretokovye metody v reactornom materialovedenii [Eddy current methods for reactor material science]. Dimitrovgrad, JSC «SSC RIAR», 2010, 216 p. (in Russian).
4. Pavlov S.V., Sukhikh A.V., Sagalov S.S. Gamma- spectrometriya v reactornom materialovedenii [Gamma spectrometry methods for reactor material science]. Dimitrovgrad, JSC «SSC RIAR» Publ. 2012, 314 p. (in Russian).
5. Troyanov V.M., Pavlov S.V. Strategiya poiska. Zadachi OAO «GNTs NIIAR» v oblasti nauchno-tekhnicheskogo obosnovaniya yadernogo topliva dlya atomnyh electrostantsiy [Search strategy. JSC «SSC RIAR» objectives in the field of scientific feasibility demonstration of nuclear fuel for nuclear power plants. Rosenergoatom. 2011, no. 4, pp. 58-61 (in Russian).
6. Pavlov S.V., Polenok V.S., Smirnov V.P. Metodika opredeleniya progibov TVS VVER-1000 pri poperechnyh nagruzheniyah [Bending measurement method as to VVER-1000 fuel assemblies under out-of-plane loading]. Sbornik trudov OAO «GNTs NIIAR» [Collection of JSC «SSC RIAR» research papers]. 1998, v. 3, pp. 85-93 (in Russian).
7. Sukhikh A.V., Sagalov S.S., Pavlov S.V., Markov D.V., Kuprienko M.V. Ispolzovanie impulsnogo metoda vikhretokovogo kontrolya dlya defektoskopii oblucheyonnyh tvelov VVER [Use of pulse eddy current method for non-destructive testing of irradiated VVER fuel rods]. Atomnaya energiya. 2009, v.107, issue no. 2, pp. 115-118 (in Russian).
8. Amosov S.V., Pavlov S.V. Specific features of the determination of the pellet-cladding gap of the fuel rods by nondestructive method. Advanced post-irradiation examination techniques for water reactor fuel. [Proc. of a Technical Committee meeting]. Dimitrovgrad, Russian Federation, 14–18 May, 2001. IAEA-TECDOC-1277, 2002. pp. 73–79.
9. Pavlov S.V. An Ultrasonic Method for the Detection of Leaking Fuel Elements in Nuclear Reactors. Russian Journal of Nondestructive Testing. 2011, v. 47, no. 5, pp. 23-38.
10. Pavlov S., Amosov S., Sagalov S., Kostyuchenko A. Express Diagnostics of WWER Fuel Rods at Nuclear Power Plants. [Proc. of the 8-th International Conference on WWER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support]. 26 September–4 October 2009, Helena Resort, Bulgaria. pp. 158-166.
11. Pavlov S.V. Stendy inspektsii, remonta i rekonstruktsii TVS [Test facilities for inspection, repair and rearrangement of fuel assemblies]. Obzor. Dimitrovgrad, NIIAR. 1996, 45 p. (in Russian).
12. Pavlov S.V., Smirnov V.P., Mytarev A.V., Vlasenko N.I., Billey D.V. Methods for WWER-1000 fuel testing under dry storage conditions. IAEA-CN-102/77P, p.541-551. Storage of Spent Fuel from Power Reactors. International Conference held in Vienna, 2-6 June 2003. IAEA-CSP-20/CD ISBN92-0-109603-8.
13. Pavlov S.V., Kritskij V.G., Il’in P.A., Shalaginova T.M., Razmashkin M.V. Materialovedcheskie problemy dlitel’nogo mokrogo isukhogo khraneniya OYaT VVER i RBMK [Material science aspects of long-term wet and dry storage of the VVER and RBMK SNF]. Sbornik dokladov IX Rossijskoj konferentsii po reaktornomu materialovedeniyu [Proc. of the IXth Russian Conference on Reactor Material Science]. Dimitrovgrad, 14–18 Sept. 2009. Dimitrovgrad, JSC «SSC RIAR» Publ. 2009, pp. 455-477 (in Russian).
14. Pavlov S.V., Sagalov S.S., Amosov S.V. Sistema nerazrushayuschego kontrolya obluchyonnyh tvelov dlya stenda inspektsii teplovydelyayuschih sborok VVER [Non-destructive inspection system of irradiated fuel elements for test inspection facility of VVER fuel assemblies]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2010, no. 3, pp. 5-11 (in Russian).