+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-11T01:17:53+03:00"
issue="2014-03"
issue_name="2014 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file="/pdf/2014/03/2014-03-article-08.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="81"
udc="621.039.71+621.039.73"
title="Method purification of liquid radioactive wastes and concentrates from organic impurities"
original_title="Метод очистки жидких радиоактивных отходов и концентратов от органической составляющей"
authors=["LegkikhKG", "SmykovVB"]
tags=["liquid radioactive wastes", "liquid radioactive concentrates", "immobilization", "sludge", "sorption purification", "anionic surface-active substances (ASAS)", "synthetic detergents"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.3.08"

+++

The issue of conversion of liquid radioactive wastes (LRW) is an important task for reactor operation irrespective of the reactor design. Currently, conversion of liquid radioactive wastes involves minimization of the volume of wastes and reducing the concentrates to an optimal form for disposal. The most general method for conversion of liquid radioactive wastes is vaporizer conversion. The realization of this method generates wastes which are difficult for conversion. This waste is a liquid radioactive concentrate (LRC). Liquid radioactive concentrate is a colloidal system composed of two phases: the water phase and the bottom sediments, or the sludge. The sludge represents mineral fine-dispersed granules with an adsorptive layer of organic substances with complex chemical composition. Cementation of the sludge is impossible to achieve. Therefore, it is necessary to purify the sludge from organic impurities. Purification of the sludge by certain methods is difficult. So carrying out research to develop immobilization technology for liquid radioactive concentrates is required [1].

A method for LRW and LRC purification by an inorganic sorbent, such as polianite, has been proposed by IPPE scientists. The research demonstrated the efficiency of LRW purification from organic impurities. The principal tasks of further research into the solidification processes which occur during chemical processing of the sludge samples were formulated on the basis of experimental data.

### References

1. Gromov B.V. Himicheskaja tehnologiya obucheniya yadernogo topliva. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1983 (in Russian).
2. Shremmer Ishtvan, Til’ki Peter. Patent RF 2286949 na izobretenie «Sposob i ustrojstvo dlya provodnogo razlozheniya organicheskogo soderzhimogo elektroprovodnyh vodnyh rastvorov othodov». Opublikovan 16.07.2002 (in Russian).
3. Savkin A.E., Svitcov A.A., Hubecov S.B. Patent RF 2268513 na izobretenie, MPK G21F9/06, G21F9/20 «Sposob pererabotki zhidkih radioaktivnyh othodov». Opublikovan 20.01.2006 (in Russian).
4. Martynov P.N., Bogdanovich N.G., Grigor’ev G.V. Patent RF 2189650 na izobretenie, MPK G21F9/12 «Sposob obezvrezhivaniya zhidkih radioaktivnyh othodov». Opublikovan 20.09.2002 (in Russian).
5. Smykov V.B. Sorbciya prirodnoj organiki na neorganicheskom sorbente pirolyuzite / Reshenie problem vodopodgotovki i vodoochistki v promyshlennom i gorodskom hozyajstve. Tezisy dokladov nauchno-tehnicheskogo seminara. Moscow, VIMI Publ., 1998 (in Russian).
6. Novikov Ju.V., Lastochkina K.O., Boldina Z.N. Metody issledovaniya kachestva vody vodoemov. Moscow, Medicina Publ., 1990 (in Russian).
7. Sobolev I.A., Dmitriev S.A., Barinov A.S. Atomnaya energiya. 1995, v. 79, iss. 6 (in Russian).
8. Sbornik dokladov II mezhdunarodnogo simpoziuma po cementirovaniyu RAO «NUECEM-2014», Francija, Avin’on-Markul’ (ICSM), 2-6 june 2014 (in Russian).