+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-11T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2014-03"
issue_name="2014 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="09"
file="/pdf/2014/03/2014-03-article-09.pdf"
first_page="82"
last_page="92"
udc="53.082.79"
title="Development of neutron spectrum analysis method to assess the content of fissile isotopes in SFA"
original_title="Разработка методики нейтронного спектрального анализа для оценки содержания делящихся изотопов в ОТВС"
authors=["MitskevichAV"]
tags=["spent fuel", "neutron spectrum analysis", "235U and 239Pu content assessment", "helium counter tube", "fission chamber", "transmission", "fuel assembly", "residence time"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.3.09"

+++

The paper presents the integrated neutron spectrum analysis as a potential method for estimating the contents of fissile isotopes in SFAs. Two method implementation variants are described: (1) measurement of SFA average transmission and (2) measurement of sample average transmission in the spectrum that has passed a SFA. The authors describe the dependences of SFA average transmission on its content of the required isotope obtained by means of two types of detectors: helium counter tube and fission chamber. Also, the authors propose a method to estimate SFA burn-up by means of the integrated NSA. In addition, SFA residence time influence on transmission is estimated.

### References

1. The Nuclear Safety Review 2013 // GC(57)/INF/3.IAEA, Austria, July 2013. Avaiable at http://www.iaea.org
2. Behrens J.W., Johnson R.G., Schrack R.A. Neutron transmission measurements to determine isotopic content of spent fuel. Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc. 1983, v. 44, p. 204.
3. Behrens J.W., Johnson R.G., Schrack R.A. Neutron resonance transmission analysis of reactor spent fuel samples. Nucl. Technology. 1984, v. 67, p. 162.
4. Schrack R.A. Uranium-235 measurement in waste material by resonance neutron radiography. Nucl. Technology. 1984, v. 67, p. 326.
5. Moxon M.C., Bricland J.B., Croft S., Bond D.S. The measurement of B10 content of enriched boron samples using time-of-flight technique. Proc. of int. conf. nuclear data for science and technology. Julich, FRG. 1991, p. 441.
6. Ishikava, Tachikava and Okhubo. Non-destructive element analysis by neutron resonance absorbtion. Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc.1988, v. AO56 (suppl. 3), p. 31.
7. Overley J.C. NRTA determination of the organic compound compositions. Int. J. Appl. Radiat. Isot. 1985, v. 36, p. 185.
8. Sterbentz J. and Chichester D. Neutron Resonance Transmission Analysis (NRTA): A Nondestructive Assay Technique for the Next Generation Safeguards Initiative’s Plutonium Assay Challenge . End-of-year report, Idaho National Laboratory, December 2010.
9. Sterbentz J. and Chichester D. Neutron Resonance Transmission Analysis (NRTA): Initial Studies of a Method for Assaying Plutonium in Spent Fuel . Preprint of 33rd ESARDA Annual Meeting, Idaho National Laboratory, May 2011.
10. Sterbentz J. and Chichester D. Assessing the Feasibility of Using Neutron Resonance Transmission Analysis (NRTA) for Assaying Plutonium in Spent Fuel Assemblies. Preprint of INMM-2012 Annual Meeting, Idaho National Laboratory, July 2012.
11. Menlove H.O., Tesche C.D., Thorpe M.M. et al. A resonance self-indication technique for isotopic assay of fissile matherials. Nuclear application. 1969, v. 6., pp. 401–408.
12. Keepin G.R., Menlove H.O. Application areas and results of nondestructive assay measurements. Safeguards technique. Proc. Symp. Karlsruhe, IAEA, Vienna. 1970, v. 2. p. 79.
13. Cheng Y.T., Garrett D.A. Resonance neutron radiography. Neutron Radiography. Proc. Conf. San Diego. 1983, p. 513.
14. Mitskevich A.V., Korovin Yu. A., Dogov A.A. Development of neutron spectrum analysis integrated variant for assessing the contents of fissile elements in spent fuel assemblies. Vestnik NRNU MEPhI. 2014, v. 3. no 1, pp. 91-96 (in Russian).
15. Anikin A.Y., Gerasimov D.K., Kuryndin A.V., Sokolov K.Y., Stroganov A.A. Werification of Software PSG2/SERPENT for calculation of isotopic content of SFA VVER-1000 and VVER-440 . Conf. material. Ensuring the safety of nuclear power plants with VVER. OKB “GIDROPRESS”. May 2013 (in Russian).