+++

categories="article"
date="2014-05-11T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2014-03"
issue_name="2014 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="12"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2014/03/12.pdf"
first_page="113"
last_page="122"
udc="621.039.56"
title="Approaches to optimization of core reactivity coefficients for the «MASTER» heat supply reactor"
original_title="Пути оптимизации коэффициентов реактивности активной зоны реактора теплоснабжения «МАСТЕР»"
authors=["TitovDM", "DorokhovichSL", "KazanskyYA"]
tags=["reactor physics", "burnable poison", "low power reactors", "reactivity coefficients"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.3.12"

+++

After the power output of the MASTER heat supply reactor increased due to insertion of an annular coolant channel, feedback coefficients deteriorated. Thereby, it was necessary to find ways to change reactivity coefficients in the new reactor design while at the same time retaining such features as natural circulation, low core pressure and outlet core temperature of the coolant. Calculations were made of the dependence of the reactivity coefficients on the annular coolant channel width and location and on fuel enrichment. The WIMS-D4 neutron-physical code was used as a calculation tool. The results showed that the feedback coefficients optimum can be achieved by reducing the annular channel width and increasing fuel enrichment. At the same time the reactivity coefficients are insensitive to changing the radius of the annular coolant channel location. Restrictions for fuel enrichment (IAEA requirements) coupled with geometry restrictions of the annular channel listed above (impossibility to remove thermal power or a significant increase in the height of the heat exchanger) have shown that the possibilities of improving feedbacks through varying the width and location of the annular channel have been used up. Possible improvements can be achieved by changing the type of burnable poison and the neutron spectrum.

### References

1. Status of innovative small and medium sized reactor designs 2012. IAEA. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Vienna, September 2012.
2. Mezhdunarodnyj seminar “Malaja energetika”. Itogi i perspektivy. [International seminar «Low Energy. Results and Prospects»]. Moscow, 2001.
3. Williams D.V., Magnuson D.W., Batch M.L, Army Package Power Reactor. AEC Research Development Report, ORNL-2128, August, 1956.
4. Kaplar E.P., Lisica F.D. Neobsluzhivaemye samoreguliruemye termojelektricheskie stancii maloj moshhnosti dlja centralizovannogo teplojenergosnabzhenija. [Non maintenance, self regulation low power thermoelectric station for centralized heat and power supply]. Mezhdunarozdnyj kongress i nauchno-tehnicheskaja vystavka “Malaja energetika i investicii”. [International congress «Low energy and investment»]. Moscow, 1994, p.43 (in Russian).
5. Dollezhal N.A., Malyshev V.M.С., Shyrokov S.V. Nekotoroye itogi jekspluatacii Belojarskoj AES im. I.V. Kurchatova. [Some results of Beloyarskaya NPP operation named Kurchatova I.V.]. Atomnaja energiya. 1974, v. 36, № 6, p. 432 (in Russian).
6. Kazansky Yu.A., Levchenko V.A., Matusevich E.S., Yurev Yu.S., Balakin I.P., Belugin V.A., Dorokhovich S.L., Kazantsev A.A., Tikhonenko A.V., Travleev A.A., Uvarov A.A. Samoreguliruemyj reaktor sverhmaloj moshhnosti dlja teplosnabzhenija «MASTER-IATJe». [Self-controlled low power reactor for heat supply «MASTER-IATE»]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2003, v.3, pp.63-71 (in Russian).
7. Kazansky Yu.A., Levchenko V.A., Matusevich E.S., Yurev Yu.S. Tehnicheskie predlozhenija dlja razrabotki koncepcii podzemnoj YEU sverhmaloj moshhnosti MASTER IATE. [Technical proposals for concept development of underground low power NP]. Sbornik tezisov, dokladov i soobshhenij. Jadernoe obshhestvo Rossii. ezhegodnaja konferencija. [Scope of thesis and reports. Russia Nuclear Society. X international conference]. Obninsk, 1999.
8. Levchenko V.A., Kazansky Yu.A., Barshevtsev V.A., Yurev Yu.S., Belugin V.A., Design concept of self-contained low power reactor «MASTER» for heat supply. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2008, v. 50. pp. 314-319.
9. Kazansky Yu.A., Levchenko V.A., Barshevtsev V.A., Yurev Yu.S., Belugin V.A., Levchenko Yu.D., Levchenko A.V., Kazantcev A.A., Titov D.M. Nekotorye nejtronno-fizicheskie i teplogidravlicheskie harakteristiki usovershenstvovannoj konstrukcii reaktora «MASTER». [Some Neutron-Physical and Thermo-Hydraulic Characteristics of Improved Facility MASTER]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2008, no. 1, p.41 (in Russian).
10. Askew J.R., Fayers F.J., Kemshell F.B. A General Description of the Lattice Code WIMS, Journal of the British Nuclear Energy Society 5, 4, 564, 1966.
11. Final report of a coordinated research project WIMS-D Library Update IAEA, December 2007.
12. Dorokhovich S.L., Kazansky Yu.A., Kazantcev A.A. Yurev Yu.S., Kovalchuk S.V., Levchenko V.A., Levchenko A.V. Gidrodinamika i teploobmen v reaktornoj ustanovke MASTER. [Hydrodynamics and Heat Transfer in Reactor Installation «MASTER»]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2012, no. 3, pp. 116–128 (in Russian).