+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:24:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="17"
udc="536.24+621.039.553.34"
title="Study into the Physical Chemistry and Technology of Alkali Liquid Metal Coolantsn for Nuclear and Thermonuclear Power Plants"
original_title="Исследования физхимии и технологии щелочных жидкометаллических теплоносителей для ядерных и термоядерных энергетических установок"
authors=["SorokinAP", "KuzinaJuA", "AskhadullinRS", "AlekseevVV"]
tags=["nuclear power plants", "thermonuclear reactors", "alkali liquid metals", "thermophysical and physicochemical processes and characteristics", "impurities", "mass transport", "codes", "purification", "control of impurity content"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.01"

+++

It is shown that, as the result of developing alkali liquid metal coolants, including
sodium, eutectic sodium-potassium alloy, lithium and cesium, the scientific basis has
been established for their application in nuclear power. The paper presents data from
investigations of thermophysical, neutronic and physicochemical properties and
characteristics of various alkali liquid metal coolants, the content of solid-phase and
dissolved impurities in coolants, mass transport of impurities in circulation circuits
with alkali liquid metal coolants, development of systems for removal of impurities,
and control of the content of impurities in alkali liquid metal coolants. Alkali liquid
metal coolants are considered as a part of a system that includes a structural material
in contact with the coolant, and a gas space that compensates for the thermal
expansion of the coolant. The state of the system is defined by the physicochemical
properties of the system’s components. And the coolant and the structural materials
also represent subsystems consisting of a base material, a coolant and impurities
contained both in the material and in the coolant. It has been shown that each alkali
liquid metal coolant has its own set of impurities that define its technology. It
depends on the physicochemical properties of the solution of the structural material
impurities and components in the coolant. Objectives have been formulated for
investigating further alkali liquid metal coolants, as stemming from the need to
improve the efficiency, environmental friendliness, reliability and safety, and for
extending the life of nuclear power plants in operation or under design. Alkali liquid
metals are promising candidate materials for being used in thermonuclear power not
only as the coolant but also as the tritium breeding medium. These include, primarily,
lithium and its eutectic alloy with lead (17 at.% of lithium). The possibility for using
lithium or a lithium-lead alloy as coolant in the blanket of the international
thermonuclear power reactor is compared.


### References

1. Subbotin V.I., Ivanovsky M.N., Arnoldov M.N. Physical and Chemical Foundations of the Use of Liquid Metal Coolants. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1970, 296 p. (in Russian).
2. Kozlov F.A., Volchkov L.G., Kuznetsov E.K., Matyukhin V.V. Liquid Metal Coolants for Nuclear Power Plants. Purification from Impurities and Their Control. Ed. F.A. Kozlov. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 128 p. (in Russian).
3. Subbotin V.I., Arnoldov M.N., Ivanovskiy M.N., Mosin A.A., Tarbov A.A. Lithium. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 1999, 263 p. (in Russian).
4. Arnoldov M.N., Loginov N.I. Liquid Metal Coolants for Thermonuclear Installations. Proc. of the Conference «Teplophizicheskie Aspekty Bezopasnosti YaEU s Reaktorami na Bystryh Nejtronakh (Teplophizika – 2005)». Report No 3.19, 7 p. Obninsk. IPPE JSC Publ., 2005. (in Russian).
5. Efanov A.D., Kozlov F.A., Rachkov V.I., Sorokin A.P., Chernonog V.L. Scientific school of the SSC RF – IPPE «Heat and Mass Transfer, Physical Chemistry and Technology of Coolants in Power Systems». / In book Itogi Nauchno-Tehnicheskoj Deyatel’nosti Institute Yadernyh Reaktorov i Teplofiziki za 2014. Eds. A.P. Sorokin, A.A. Trufanov, T.N. Vereshchagina. Obninsk. GNTs RF – FEI Publ., 2015, pp. 24-51 (in Russian).
6. Rachkov V.I., Arnol’dov M.N., Efanov A.D., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Loginov N.I., Orlov Y.I., Sorokin A.P. Use of Liquid Metals in Nuclear and Thermonuclear Engineering, and in Other Innovative Technologies. Teploenergrtika. 2014, no. 5, pp. 20-30; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040363614050087 (in Russian).
7. Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N. Two-Component Nuclear Power System with a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle Based on BN and VVER Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2016, v. 120, iss. 4, pp. 233-239; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0123-x .
8. Askhadullin R.Sh. Arnoldov M.N., Ignat’ev V.V. Liquid Metals and Salt Solutions in Thermonuclear Power Engineering. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2021, 160 p. (in Russian).
9. Teplofizicheskaya Stendovaya Baza Atomnoy Energetiki Rossii i Kazakhstana. Eds. V.A.Pershukov, A.V. Arkhangelsky, O.E. Kononov, A.P. Sorokin. Sarov. FGUP RFYaTs – VNIIEF, 2016, 160 p. (in Russian).
10. Kirillov P.L., Terent’eva M.I., Deniskina N.B. Thermophysical Properties of Nuclear Power’s Materials. Handbook for Universities. Ed. prof. P.L. Kirillov. Moscow. IzdAT, 2007, 194 p. (in Russian).
11. Shpi’lrain E.E., Yakimovich K.A., Totskiy E.E. et al. Thermophysical Properties of Alkali Metals. Moscow. Izdatel’stvo Standartov Publ., 1970, 488 p. (in Russian).
12. Bystrov P.I., Kagan D.N., Krechetova G.A., Shpil’rain E.E. Liquid Metal Coolants for Heat Pipes and Power Plants. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1988, 263 p. (in Russian).
13. Handbook of Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Alkali Metals. Ed. R.W. Ohse. Oxford. Blackwell Scientific Publ., 1985, 987 p.
14. Alekseev V.V., Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A. Modeling of the Mass Transfer of Steel Corrosion Products in Sodium Loop. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 127, iss. 5, pp. 269-273; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00622-6 .
15. Kozlov F.A., Alekseev V.V., Sorokin A.P. Development of sodium coolant technology for fast reactors. Atomic Energy. 2014, v. 116, iss. 4, pp. 278-284; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-014-9854-8 .
16. Kozlov F.A., Konovalov M.A., Sorokin A.P. Purification of Liquid Metal Systems with Sodium Coolant From Oxygen Using Getters. Thermal Engineering. 2016, v. 63, no. 5, pp. 367-373, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601516050049 .
17. Alekseev V.V., Kovalev Yu.P., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Kumaev V.Ya., Kondratyev A.S., Matyukhin V.V., Pirogov E.P., Sergeev G.P., Sorokin A.P., Torbenkova I.Yu. Sodium Coolant Purification Systems for a Nuclear Power Stations Equipped with a BN-1200 Reactor. Thermal Engineering. 2013, v. 60, no. 5, pp. 311-322; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601513050017 .
18. Kozlov F.A., Kalyakin S.G., Sorokin A.P., Alekseev V.V., Trufanov A.A., Konovalov M.A., Orlova E.A. Features of Technology of Purification from Impurities of High-Temperature Sodium Coolant in a Fast Reactor for Hydrogen Production and Other Innovative Applications. Izvestiya Vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 4, pp. 114-124; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.11 (in Russian).
19. Chechyotkin Yu.V., Kizin V.D., Polyakov V.I. Radiation Safety of Nuclear Power Plants with a Fast Reactor and Sodium Coolant. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983, 124 p. (in Russian).
20. Blokhin V.A., Borisov V.V., Kamaev A.A., Kukharchuk O.F. Meshakin V.I., Pakhomov I.A., Poplavsky V.M., Suvorov A.A., Trufanov A.A. Sensors for Intra-Reactor Control of Hydrogen and Oxygen in Liquid Sodium. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty. 2017, iss. 4. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/en/year2017/4/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/1388-1.html (accessed Jan. 30, 2022) (in Russian).