+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/03.pdf"
first_page="30"
last_page="41"
udc="621.039.51"
title="A Spatial Dynamic Model of the SHELF-M Reactor Facility with Fuel and Coolant Temperature Feedbacks"
original_title="Пространственная динамическая модель реакторной установки ШЕЛЬФ-М с обратными связями по температуре топлива и теплоносителя"
authors=["KrivosheinIN", "KuznetsovPB", "IvanyutaAN", "PlotnikovDA", "LobarevAL"]
tags=["pressurized water cooled water moderated reactor", "dynamics", "feedbacks", "simulation"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.03"

+++

The evolution of nuclear power is inseparably associated with the development of breakthrough solutions in the field of economic development of new territories. A pressing issue in this connection nowadays is generation of power for remote and hard-to-reach areas with decentralized power supply. To resolve this issue, JSC NIKIET is developing a version of the SHELF-M modular water-cooled water-moderated reactor facility for use in small nuclear power plants as a source of power for offshore installations, including in the Arctic coast areas, as well as in localities with practically no power and transport infrastructure. One of the stages in justifying the safety of the reactor facility operation is to investigate the behavior of the reactor in dynamic transient modes at various power levels. To this end, a spatial dynamic model of the reactor has been developed with fuel and coolant temperature feedbacks. The development of a dynamic model is a complex process that includes both preparation of constants for subsequent calculations and formation of the reactor neutronic and thermophysical models. The paper describes the development stages of the SHELF-M reactor spatial dynamic model and the results of coupled neutronic and thermophysical calculations for transients using the developed dynamic model of the reactor. Movement of shim rods in the cold and hot states of the SHELF-M reactor facility is considered asnon-steady-state transients modes.

### References

1. Voropay N.I., Saneev B.G., Ivanova I.Yu., Izhbuludin A.K. Comparative Efficiency of Using Small Nuclear Power Reactors in Local Energy Systems in the East of Russia. Proc. of the Conference «Small Nuclear Power Reactors: a New Direction for Energy Development». Moscow. Academ-Print Publ., 2015, p. 59 (in Russian).
2. Pimenov A.O., Kulikov D.G., Vasiliev A.P., Molokanov N.A. Small Nuclear Power Reactors in the Arctic Territories: Issues of Economic Feasibility and Environmental Safety. Arktika: Ecologiya i Ekonomika. 2019, No. 2(34), p. 120-128; DOI: https://doi.org/10.25283/2223-4594-2019-2-120-128 (in Russian).
3. Goltsov A.E., Molokanov N.A. Assessment of SMRs Competitiveness Based on the SHELF Nuclear Facility for Isolated Territories on the Example of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutiya). In: Scientific and Technical Annual Report NIKIET-2019. Moscow. NIKIET JSC Publ., 2019, p. 260-263 (in Russian).
4. Goltsov E.N., Kulikov D.G., Pimenov A.O., Rapnitsky V.A. SHELF-M Modular Reactor Facility for Small Nuclear Power Plants. Proc. of the International Scientific and Technical Conference «Innovative Nuclear Power Designs and Technologies (NIKIET1 2016)». September 27 – 30, 2016. Vol. 1. Moscow. NIKIET JSC Publ., 2016, pp. 582-586 (in Russian).
5. Dragunov Yu.G., Shishkin V.A., Grechko G.I., Goltsov E.N. Small Nuclear Power: Problems and Answers, Atomnaya Energiya. 2011, v. 111, iss. 5, pp. 293-297 Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t111-5_2011/go,56/ (accessed Mar. 29, 2022) (in Russian).
6. Alekseev A.I., Goltsov E.N., Grechko G.I., Eremeev D.V., Pepa V.N. SMR Uniterm is One of Actual Directions in the Development of Nuclear Energy. Proc. of the Conference «Small Nuclear Power Reactors: a New Direction for Energy Development». Moscow. Academ-Print Publ., 2015, p. 219 (in Russian).
7. Andreeva L.A., Goltsov E.N., Kaplienko A.V., Kudinov V.V., Kulikov D.G., Molokanov N.A., Pimenov A.O. Actual Developmental Problems of Small Energy Installations: SNPP Based on the SHELF-M Reactor Installation. Atomic Energy. 2020. v. 129, iss. 4, pp. 201-207; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00734-7 .
8. Alekseev N.I., Bolshagin S.N., Gomin E.A., Gorodkov S.S., Gurevich M.I., Kalugin M.A., Kulakov A.S., Marin S.V., Novoseltsev A.P., Oleinik D.S., Pryanishnikov A.V., Sukhino-Khomenko E.A., Shkarovsky D.A., Yudkevich M.S. MCU-5 status. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2011, iss. 4, 2011, pp. 5-23 (in Russian).
9. «FACT-BR» (Version 1.1). Certification Passport of the Software No 433 dated 02.27.2018 (in Russian).
10. Ivanyuta A.N., Ionov A.I., Sakharova T.Yu. Certificate of State Registration of the Software «IVIS-BR»: No 2021610722 dated 01.02.2021 (in Russian).