+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/06.pdf"
first_page="65"
last_page="75"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Ranking of Information Flows in the Technical Diagnostics Systems of the VVER-1200 Power Unit"
original_title="Ранжирование информационных потоков в системах технического диагностирования энергоблока ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["BocharovaNA", "VoronovAV", "SlepovMT"]
tags=["VVER-1200", "technical diagnostics system", "diagnostic information", "software and hardware complex", "vibration control system", "free objects control system", "control and diagnostic control system"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.06"

+++

In conditions of increasing requirements for the reliability, safety and durability of power units, technical diagnostics systems are beginning to come growingly into use, having evolved, in the process of their development, from simple indicator systems to complex software and hardware systems (SHS) that require nontrivial skills and diverse knowledge to operate. The final information provided by an SHS is specific and comprehensible only by personnel of the NPP’s diagnostic departments, this complicating both the operation of diagnostic systems and discredits the very concept of early and timely detection of defects. This paper presents the structure of information flows in modern technical diagnostics systems (TDS),as applied to the innovative VVER-1200 power unit, on the example of Novovoronezh NPP, and diagnostic results in the form of regular reporting forms with generalized information about the serviceability of the TDS components and the system as a whole. The information received from technical diagnostics systems is analyzed in detail, and the concept proposed by the authors is considered for compression of diagnostic information into a form which can be easily conceived by operating personnel and is of a universal nature, with the possibility of being placed on an electronic or paper carrier.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. VVER Diagnostic Systems. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2010, 319 p. ISBN 978-5-02-040184-6 (in Russian).
2. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T. Vibration Acoustics Applied to VVER-1200 Reactor Plant. World Scientific, 2021, 586 p.; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1142/12220 .
3. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T. Vibroacoustics in applications to the VVER-1200 reactor plant. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2018, 469 p. (in Russian).
4. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko, V.I., Slepov M.T. Noise Monitoring in Applications to the VVER-1200 Reactor Plant (Part 1). Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2021, 221 p. Avaiable at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/arkadov_shumovoy-monitoring_2021/go,0/ (accessed Jan. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
5. Regulatory Guide 1.133. Loose Part Detection Program for the Primary System of Light Water Cooled Reactors: Tech. Rep. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1981, 6 p.
6. Operation and Maintenance of Nuclear Power Plants. Part 12 Loose Part Monitoring. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), 2015, 523 p.
7. IEC 60988. Nuclear Power Plants. Devices Important to Safety. Acoustic Monitoring Systems for Detection of Loose Parts: Characteristics, Design Criteria and Operational Procedures. 2009, 75 p.
8. GOST R ISO 13379-1-2015. Condition Monitoring and Diagnostics of Machines. Methods of Data Interpretation and Diagnostics. General Guidance. Part 1. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2015, 33 p. (in Russian).
9. Olma B. Determining the Location of the Source and Mass Estimation in the Monitoring of Loose Parts of the LWR. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 1985, v. 15, pp. 583-594; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0149-1970 (85)90086-1.
10. Choi Y.C., Park J.H., Choi K.S. An Impact Source Localization Technique for a Nuclear Power Plant by Using Sensors of Different Types. ISA Transactions. 2011, v. 50, no. 1, pp. 111-118; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2010.08.004 .
11. Park J.H., Kim Y.H. Impact Source Localization on an Elastic Plate in a Noisy Environment. Measurement Science and Technology. 2006, v. 17, no. 10, pp. 2757-2766; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/17/10/030 .
12. Ki H.I., Seong In M., Soon Woo H. ANN Based Localization of Metal Ball Impacts on Reactor Pressure Boundary Structure. / Transactions of the Korean Nuclear Society Autumn Meeting Gyeongju, Korea, October 26-27. 2017. 3 p.
13. Figedy S., Oksa G. Modern Methods of Signal Processing in the Loose Part Monitoring System. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2005, v. 46 (3-4), pp. 253-267; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2005.03.008 .
14. Liska J., Kunkel S. Localization of Loose Part Impacts on the General 3D Surface of the Nuclear Power Plant Coolant Circuit Components. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2017, v. 99, pp. 140-146; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.05.004 .
15. Zheng H., Cao Y., Yang J. A Method for Estimating Impact Location of Loose Part Using HHT. Proc. of the Fourth International Symposium on Precision Mechanical Measurements. Eds. Y. Fei, K. C. Fan, R. Lu. SPIE, 12.2008, 6 p.; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.819732 .
16. Truong C., Oudre L., Vayatis N. A Review of Change Point Detection Methods. 2018, 46 p. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00718 (accessed Jan. 20, 2022).
17. Lavielle M. Using Penalized Contrasts for the Change Point Problem. Signal
Processing. 2005, v. 85, no. 8, pp. 1501-1510; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2005.01.012 .