+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/07.pdf"
first_page="76"
last_page="83"
udc="621.039.534:541.15"
title="Radiolysis of the Coolant in the EGP-6 Reactor of the Bilibino NPP"
original_title="Радиолиз теплоносителя в реакторе ЭГП-6 Билибинской АЭС"
authors=["KazantsevAA", "SupotnitskayaOV", "IvanovaEA", "MoskovchenkoIV", "MukhamadeevRI", "TimofeevVF", "AstakhovaNE"]
tags=["tank-type boiling water reactor", "radiolysis products", "similarity theory", "VK-50", "Bilibinо NPP", "EGP-6", "hydrogen explosion safety"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.07"

+++

The paper presents the results of estimations for hydrogen generation as a result of radiolytic processes during coolant boiling in the fuel tubes of the Bilibino NPP EGP-6 reactor’s fuel assemblies in conditions of the coolant natural circulation. The experimental justification for the hydrogen explosion safety was carried out earlier at the VK-50 research reactor both during normal operation and in accident conditions. According to the experimental data obtained at the operating VK-50 boiling water reactor, radiolytic processes for boiling water reactors have three qualitatively different modes. This study uses similarity theory to transfer the experimental radiolysis data from the VK-50 reactor facility to the operating conditions of the Bilibino NPP with the EGP-6 single-circuit reactor. It has been demonstrated that generation of hydrogen in the process of radiolysis is defined by the average value of the reactor outlet steam quality. Hydrogen explosion safety has been shown to be ensured for all operating modes of the EGP-6 reactor facility. With the condenser nominal pressure of below 16 kPa, the steam-gas mixture is absolutely explosion-proof and does not ignite even in the event an electric discharge. Therefore, the explosion safety of hydrogen in the condenser itself is defined not so much by the bulk concentration of hydrogen as by the absolute pressure in the condenser.

### References

1. NP-040-02. Rules for Ensuring Hydrogen Explosion Protection at a Nuclear Power Plant. Moscow. Gosatomnadzor Rossii Publ., 2002, 10 p. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200034921?ysclid=l5hteiyuyk105526523 (accessed Mar. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
2. ByakovV.M., Stepanov S.V., Magomedbekov E.P. Beginning of Radiation Chemistry II. Radiolysis of Liquid Water: Textbook. Moscow. Mendeleev RKhTU Publ., 2017, 128 p. ISBN: 978-5-7237-1566-0 (in Russian).
3. GordeevA.V., ErshovB.G., KabakchiS.A., GrishkinV.L., BugaenkoV.L. Calculation of the Accumulation of Molecular Products during the Radiolysis of Water in Vessels of Free Surface above Volume. Atomnaya Energiya. 1989, v. 67, iss. 6, pp. 393-396. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t67-6_1989/go,26/ (accessed Mar. 20, 2022); DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01124962 (in Russian).
4. Zabelin A.I., Shmelev V.E. Radiolysis of the Coolant in the VK-50 Boiling Water Reactor. Atomic Energy. 1986, v. 60, iss. 4, pp. 290-294. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01123898 .
5. Kurskij A.S. Radiolysis of Coolant and Methods for Ensuring Explosion-Proof of the Vessel Boiling Reactor. Vestnik NIYaU MEPhI. 2014, v. 3, no. 1, pp. 85-90; DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.1134/S2304487X14010131 . eLIBRARY ID: 21136676, EDN: RUNWST (in Russian).
6. Kurskij A.S. Methods of Complex Solution of Radiation Safety Problems and Hydrogen Explosion Protection of Vessel Boiling Reactors with Natural Circulation of Coolant. Diss. Dr. Sci. (Engineering). Moscow. NITs «Kurchatov Institute» Publ., 2014, 185 p. Available at: https://www.dissercat.com/content/metody-kompleksnogo-resheniya-problem-radiatsionnoi-bezopasnosti-i-vodorodnoi-vzryvozashchit?ysclid=l5hsi6xqtm132417463 (accessed Mar. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
7. KurskijA.S. Radiolysis of Coolant and Methods for Ensuring Explosion-Proof of the Vessel Boiling Reactor VK-50. Atomnaya Energiya. 2013, v. 115, iss. 5, pp. 250-255; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-014-9787-2 . eLIBRARY ID: 21003099, EDN: RRPWSZ (in Russian).
8. Ivanov V.S., Serebryansky F.Z. Gas)Oil System of Hydrogen)Cooled Generators. Ed. P.I. Ustinov. Moscow. Energiya Publ., 1970, 320 p. (in Russian).
9. Voronin L.M., Protsenko A.N., Stolyarevsky A.Ya. et al. Nuclear Science and Technology of the USSR. Ed. A.M. Petrosyants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 312 p. (Chapter 1.9. Operation Experience of Bilibino ATETs, pp. 66-75). Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-nauka-i-tehnika-sssr_1987/go,66/ (accessed Mar. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
10. Dolgov V.V. Bilibinо NPP – Thirty Years of Operation in Extreme Conditions of the Extreme North-East of Russia. Istoriya Atomnoy Energetiki Sovetskogo Souyuza i Rossii. 2004, iss. 5. Istoriya Maloy Atomnoy Energetiki. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/istoriya-atomnoy-energetiki_v5_2004/go,118/ (accessed Mar. 20, 2022) (in Russian).