+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/09.pdf"
first_page="95"
last_page="105"
udc=" 620.193.4+519.216.3"
title="Probabilistic Estimation of the Residual Lifetime of the VVER Coolant Loop Elements in Aging Control"
original_title="Вероятностное оценивание остаточного ресурса элементов контура теплоносителя реактора ВВЭР при управлении старением"
authors=["GulinaOM", "MerkunAV", "SemishkinVP"]
tags=["lifetime management", "aging processes", "residual lifetime", "damage accumulation", "failure rate"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.09"

+++

The main processes that limit the lifetime of the elements of the reactor coolant circuit (RCC) are high- and low-cycle fatigue, various types of embrittlement of materials as well as fatigue crack growth. These processes can be intensified by the influence of corrosion. Important for making decisions on the operation of the RCC is the residual resource, i.e., the time to the limit state, on the basis of which the lifetime (aging) is controlled. The residual life is estimated using mathematical models (both analytical and simulation ones) of aging processes in the form that is possible on the basis of the existing operating experience and control data. Methods for obtaining estimates of residual lifetime for various descriptions of aging processes are related to the problem of level crossing either by an observed process, or by a damage accumulation process, or by a fatigue crack growth process. In this case, the traditional deterministic conservative calculation can be supplemented by obtaining a probabilistic estimate of the lifetime, if relevant information is available, in the form of operational control data, as well as taking into account the uncertainties associated with the characteristics of the metal, the quality of the control means, the method of mathematical description of the operating modes of the elements, etc. The article deals with the issues of obtaining probabilistic lifetime estimates as indicators of reliability for some models of aging processes as part of lifetime management. The idea refers to ways of building a time series using control points and obtaining lifetime estimates with appropriate confidence intervals.

### References

1. NP-096-15. Requirements for Lifetime Management of Equipment and Pipelines of Nuclear Power Plants. Basic Provisions. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 19 p. Available at: https://standartgost.ru/g/%D0%9D%D0%9F_096-15 (accessed Jun. 18, 2022) (in Russian).
2. Gulina O.M., Merkun A.V., Semishkin V.P. Risk-Informed Approach in Ageing Management Methodology. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2021, iss. 2, pp. 92-98. Available at: (accessed Jun. 18, 2022) (in Russian).
3. Egishyants S.A., Gulina O.M., Konovalov E.N. Estimation of Lifetime Distribution under Damages Accumulation. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1997, no. 1, pp.18-21 (in Russian).
4. Antonov A.V., Nikulin M.S. Statistical Methods in Reliability Theory. Moscow. Abris Publ., 2012, 390 p. (in Russian).
5. Dmitrienko A.G., Blinov A.V., Volkov D.V., Volkov V.S. Technical Diagnostics. Assessment of the State and Forecasting of the Residual Lifetime of Technically Complex Objects. Textbook. Eds. D.I. Nefediev, B.V. Tsypin. Penza. Penzensky Gosudarstvenny Universitet Publ., 2013, 62 p. Available at: https://dep_pribor.pnzgu.ru/files/dep_pribor.pnzgu.ru/uchebnoe_posobie_iyul_2013.pdf (accessed Jun. 18, 2022) (in Russian).
6. Gulina O.M. Physic/Statistical Models of Lifetime Management of Equipment of the Second Circuit of Nuclear Power Plants. Dr. Sci. (Engineering) Diss. Obninsk. IATE MEPhI Publ., 2009, 344 p.
7. Semishkin V.P., Bogachev A.V., Merkun A.V., Shary N.V. Lifetime Management of Passive Components of VVER Reactor Plants (Introduction to Methodology). Tyazhyoloe Mashinostroenie. 2017, no. 9, pp. 2-9 (in Russian).
8. PNAE G-7-002-86. Standards for Calculating the Strength of Equipment and Pipelines of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 528 p. Available at: https://ohranatruda.ru/upload/iblock/5c7/4293842075.pdf (accessed Jun. 18, 2022) (in Russian).
9. Likhachyov Yu.I., Pupko V.Ya. Strength of Fuel Elements of Nuclear Reactors. – Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975, 278 p. (in Russian).
10. Gulina O.M., Salnikov N.L. Calculation of Lifetime Characteristics of Equipment under the Conditions of Nonlinear Effects of Degradation Processes. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1999, no. 4, pp. 11-15 (in Russian).
11. Gulina O.M., Romanchuk N.S., Merkun A.V. The Use of Statistical Procedures when Estimating the Number of Plugged Tubes of Steam Generator. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2020, iss. 2, pp. 34-42. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/vant/va-20-s2 (accessed Jun. 18, 2022) (in Russian).
12. Barlow R., Proshan F. Mathematical Theory of Reliability. Moscow. Sovetskoe Radio Publ., 1969, 488 p. (in Russian).