+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/10.pdf"
first_page="106"
last_page="119"
udc="621.039.59"
title="Examination of Fuel Elements Irradiated in the Reactor of the World’s First NPP After Long-Term Storage"
original_title="Исследование твэлов, облученных в реакторе Первой в мире АЭС, после длительного хранения"
authors=["IvanovSN", "PorolloSI", "ShulepinSV", "BaranayevYuD", "TimofeevVF", "KharizomenovYuV"]
tags=["long-term storage", "fuel assembly (FA)", "fuel element", "cladding", "corrosion", "fuel composition", "metallographic studies", "mechanical properties"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.10"

+++

Examinations of fuel elements with two different fuel compositions, U-Mo+Mg and UO2+Mg, irradiated in the AM reactor after their long-term storage do not reveal any visible defects on the surface of their outer claddings. However, in the fuel elements with U-Mo fuel, an increase in the diameter of the outer cladding is observed. This is most noticeable in the upper part of the fuel element. Storage of the fuel elements with UO2 fuel for 15 – 22 years does not lead to a change in their diameter within the measurement accuracy. At the same time, metallographic studies have shown that on the external surface of the outer cladding and the internal surface of the inner cladding of the fuel elements with U-Mo+Mg and UO2+Mg fuel compositions, after long-term storage, defects are observed in the form of intergranular and irregular frontal corrosion, pits and pittings up to 20 mm deep. No interaction is found at the points of contact between the fuel claddings and the fuel composition of the layers. There is no noticeable decrease in the thickness of the outer and inner claddings of the fuel elements after long-term storage, nor does the thickness of the claddings at the locations of defects go beyond its minimum initial value, taking into account the technological tolerance for variations in thickness. It is noteworthy, however, that cracks are found in both types of fuel elements both in the fuel grains and in the magnesium matrix. As a result of long-term storage of the fuel elements with U-Mo fuel for 45 – 55 years, the mechanical properties of their outer claddings gradually degrade, due to which the plasticity of the cladding is significantly reduced.

### References

1. Solonin M.I., Ioltukhovsky A.G., Veluhanov V.P., Kadarmetov I.M., Sinelnikov L.P., Timokhin A.N., Golosov O.A., Kuznetsov V.R., Tsykanov V.A., Pavlov S.V., Markov D.V., Smirnov V.P. Material-related Problems of Long Term Dry and Wet Storage of Spent Nuclea Fuel of RBMK-1000. Proc. of the VIth Russian Conference on Reactor Materials. Dimitrovgrad, 11-15 Sept., 2000, v. 2, no. 2, pp. 3-22 (in Russian).
2. Volkova I.N., Grin P.I., Kobylyansky G.P., Lyadov G.D., Maershina G.I., Novoselov A.E., Smirnov V.P. State of RBMK-1000 Fuel Pins with E110 Alloy Claddings after Long Wet Storage. Proc. of the VIIth Russian Conference on Reactor Materials., Dimitrovgrad, 08-12 Sept., 2003, v. 2, no. 1, pp. 258-266. (in Russian).
3. Sidorenko V.A. Conceptual Aspects of Nuclear Power Development in Russia up to 2010. Atomic Energy. 1994, v. 76, iss.4, pp. 253-257; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02422952 .
4. Golosov O.A., Nikolkin V.N., Semerikov V.B., Staritsin S.V., Bedin V.V. Corrosion of Spent Nuclear Fuel of AMB Reactors. Proc. of the Xth Russian Conference on Reactor Materials. Dimitrovgrad, 27-31 May, 2013, pp. 253-288 (in Russian).
5. Golosov O.A., Nikolkin V.N., Lutikova M.S.. Fractional Content of Corrosion Products of Spent Nuclear Fuel of AMB Reactors. Proc. of the Xth Russian Conference on Reactor Materials. Dimitrovgrad, 27-31 May, 2013, pp. 288-300 (in Russian).
6. The International Nuclear Event Scale (INES) User’s Manual 2008 Edition. Jointly prepared by IAEA and OECD/NEA. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2010.
7. Mukhamadeev R.I., Baranaev Yu.D., Suvorov A.P. Severe Beyond Design Basis Accident
on Bilibino NPP EGP-6 Reactor. Analysis of Consequences of the Radiological Accident for
Public. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no.2, pp. 89-100; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.09 (in Russian).
8. Parafilo L.M., Mukhamadeev R.I., Baranaev Yu.D., Suvorov A.P. Analisis of Severe Beyond Design Basis Accident for the EGP-6 Reactor Facility at Bilibino NPP. Release Source Term Formation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 1, pp.99-111; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.10 (in Russian).
9. Ivanov S.N., Porollo S.I., Baranaev Yu. D., Timofeev V.F., Kharizomenov Yu.V. Corrosion Tests in Water of Fuel Pins Irradiated in the World’s First NPP Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 3, pp.120-134; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.11 (in Russian).
10. Gaiazov A.Z., Leshchenko A.Yu., Smirnov V.P., Ilyin P.A., Teplov V.G. A Study of Flammable Gas Generation and Radionuclide Release During Underwater Handling of AM Reactor Spend Fuel. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2021, no. 2, pp. 71-82; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.2.07 (in Russian).
11. Gaiazov A.Z., Komarov S.V., Leshchenko A.Yu., Revenko K.E., Smirnov V.P., Zvir E.A., Ilyin P.A., Teplov V.G. Study of Hydroged Gas Generation and Radionuclide Release During Wet Damaged Oxide Spend Fuel Storage. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 3, pp.125-136; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.3.11 (in Russian).
12. Ibragimov Sh.Sh., Syshchikov L.A., Voronin I.M., Kudryishov V.G. Study of Spent Fuel Elements from the First Atomic Electric Station. Atomic Energy. 1964, v. 14, iss. 5, pp. 482-485; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01121892 .
13. Ivanov S.N., Dvoryashin A.M., Popov V.V., Porollo S.I., Shulepin S.V. Post-Reactor Studies of Fuel Assemblies and a Control-and-Safety System Channel of the Reactor in the First in the World Nuclear Power Plant. Atomic Energy. 2011, v.110, iss. 2, pp. 82-92; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-011-9395-3 .
14. Ivanov S.N., Dvoriashin A.M., Shulepin S.V., Porollo S.I., Velichko V.V. Application of
Scanning Electron Microscopy and X Ray Microanalysis for Investigation Pins of the
Worid’s First Power Plant. Proc. of the Techn. Com. Meeting of Advanced Post=Irradiation
Examination Techniques for Water reactor Fuel. Dimitrovgrad, 14-18 May 2001, IAEA-TECDOC-1277, 2002, pp. 137-145. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/33/018/33018348.pdf (accessed May 7, 2022).
15. Ivanov S.N., Konobeev Yu.V., Starkov O.V., Porollo S.I., Dvoryashin A.M. & Shulepin S.V. Materials-Technology Investigations of Fuel Elements, Irradiated in a Reactor at the Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant, After Standing for 38 Years in a Depository. Atomic Energy. 2000, v. 88, pp. 184-189; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02673157 .
16. Ushakov G.N. World First Nuclear Power Plant (Construction and Operation Experience). Moscow-Leningrad. Gosenergoizdat Publ., 1959, 185 p. (in Russian).
17. Weber C.F., Girsh A.V. Dispersive Fuel Pins. In Proc. of the Intern. Conf. on the Peace Use of Atomic Energy, 1955, Geneva. Moscow. Gosudarsnvennoe Nauchno-Tekhnicheskoe Izdatel’stvo po Chyornoy i Tsvetnoy Metallurgii Publ., 1956, pp. 298-304 (in Russian).
18. Samojlov A.G., Kashtanov A.I., Volkov V.S. Dispersive Fuel Pins of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1969, 583 p. (in Russian).
19. Tsykanov V.A., Davydov E.F. Radiation Resistance of Fuel Pins of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1977, 136 p. (in Russian).