+++

categories="article"
date="2022-09-23T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2022-03"
issue_name="2022 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/03/14.pdf"
first_page="158"
last_page="167"
udc="53.043:621.039"
title="Three-Dimensional Models and Complimentary Geometry for Dose Evaluation in NG-24MT Based Neutron Radiotherapy Cabinet"
original_title="Трехмерные модели и дополнение геометрии для оценки доз в лучевой кабине нейтронной терапии на базе генератора НГ-24МТ"
authors=["ChernukhaAE", "SaburovVO", "AdarovaAI", "SolovevAN", "KizilovaYuV", "KoryakinSN"]
tags=["model", "Monte Carlo method", "induced activity", "complimentary geometry", "radiation hygiene"]
rubric = "medicine"
rubric_name = "Nuclear medicine and biology"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.3.14"

+++

The neutron radiation shielding problem is a comprehensive challenge which requires the strong mathematical methodology and physics background. The current work proposes neutron and residual gamma fields’ estimation inside the three-dimensional model of the radiotherapy canyon together with allocated equipment. The canyon geometrical model and conformal barrier shielding implemented as complimentary grid cell layer. The results contain the Monte-Carlo based dose calculation for NG-24MT portable neutron generator realistic model. The absorbed dose estimated both during the irradiation process as well as after generator shutdown taking into account induced radioactivity inside the walls and the facility elements from stainless steel and tungsten composite. These values assessed inside the canyon and outside on the operator and medical stuff working site. The key elements of the facility structure are the gantry system, the movable positioner system, the collimation system and the neutron generator itself. Some innovative engineering solutions were proposed, including but not limited to the wall geometry and material. All the resulted estimated values show the acceptable dose rate level for A-group of personnel on their workplaces and entering the canyon after the required time gate tolerance. Overall, the research and development stage is an essential and crucial component of project design and engineering, and the radiation hygiene properties are pivotal for successful implementation of radiation treatment procedures planned on this machine. Overall, the fast neutron therapy offers its technological advances while its noteworthy biological efficiency serves the higher tumor kill probability, providing the improved patients’ survival and higher quality of life.

### References

1. Sood A. The Monte Carlo Method and MCNP – A Brief Review of Our 40 Year History. Int. Topical Meeting on Industrial Radiation and Radioisotope Measurement – Aplications Conference, Chicago IL, July, 2005. Available at: https://mcnp.lanl.gov/pdf_files/la-ur-17-26533.pdf (accessed Jun. 17, 2022).
2. Tuchin V.V. Optical biomedical diagnostics. Izvestiya Saratovskogo Universiteta. Novaya seriya. Seriya Fizika. 2005, v. 5, no 1, pp. 39-53; DOI: https://doi/org/10.18500/1817-3020-2005-5-1-39-53 (in Russian).
3. Norden A.P. A Short Course of Differential Geometry. Moscow. Gosudarstvennoe Izdatel’stvo Fiziko-Matematicheskoy Literatury Publ., 1958, 244 p. (in Russian).
4. Hermogenova T.A. Selected Works. Volume 2. Moscow. IPM im. M.V. Keldysha Publ., 2017, 260 p. (in Russian).
5. Orlov I.V. Compact Subdifferentials and Hausdorff Metrics. Proc. of the Seminar on Constructive Non-Smooth Analysis and Non-Differentiable Optimization «CNSA & NDO», 2017. Available at: http://www.apmath.spbu.ru/cnsa/pdf/2017/OrlovI_30nov2017.pdf (accessed Jun. 17, 2022) (in Russian).
6. Brun R., Rademakers F. ROOT – An Object Oriented Data Analysis Framework. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A,1997, v. 389, pp. 81-86; DOI: https://doi/org/10.1016/S0168-9002(97)00048-X .
7. Sadovnichy V.A. Theory of Operators: a Textbook for Universities. Moscow. Drofa Publ., 200, 381 p. (in Russian).
8. Korovin Yu.A., Maksimushkina A.V. Calculation of Isotopic Composition and Induced Activity of Irradiated Materials of Innovative Electronuclear Installations. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedenij. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 51-61; DOI: https://doi/org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.06 (in Russian).
9. Varlamov V.V., Ishhanov B.S., Komarov S.Yu. Atomic Nuclei. Main Properties: Textbook. Moscow. Universitetskaya Kniga Publ., 2010, 334 p. (in Russian).
10. Jones B. Clinical Radiobiology of Fast Neutron Therapy: What was Learnt? Front. Oncol. 2020, v. 10, no. 1537; DOI: https://doi/org/10.3389/fonc.2020.01537 .
11. Gordon K.B., Saburov V.O., Koryakin S.N., Gulidov I.A., Fatkhudinov T.Kh., Arutyunyan I.V., Kaprin A.D., Solov’ev A.N. Calculation of the Biological Efficiency of the Proton Component from 14.8 MeV Neutron Irradiation in Computational Biology with Help of Video Cards. Byulleten’ Eksperimental’noj Biologii i Meditsiny. 2022, v. 173, no. 2, pp. 263-267; DOI: https://doi/org/10.47056/0365-9615-2022-173-2-263-267 (in Russian).
12. Rodionov M.V., Koryakin S.N., Saburov V.O., Moiseev A.S., PetrovaYu.V., Ivanov S.A., Shegay P.V., Kaprin A.D. Fast Neutrons Irradiation as a Way to Overcome Feline Squamous Cell Carcinoma Radioresistance: a Pilot Study. Radiatsiya i Risk. Byulleten’ Natsional’nogo Radiatsionno-Epidemiologicheskogo Registra. 2022, v. 31, no. 1, pp. 115-126; DOI: https://doi/org/10.21870/0131-3878-2022-31-1-115-126 (in Russian).