+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-18T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="15"
udc="502.53, 502.55"
title="Nuclear Power Engineering as an Important Element of Russia’s National Priority Projects"
original_title="Атомная энергетика в национальных проектах России"
authors=["GorinNV", "EkidinAA", "GolovikhinaOS"]
tags=["nuclear energy", "National Priority Projects", "main challenges of the present day"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.01"

+++

The general public supports the need for a transition to green power production, most often under-standing by this the use of solar and wind energy. However, it would be a mistake to believe that solar and wind power plants will be able to fully solve the problem of uninterrupted energy supply to all sectors of the economy, due to the instability of generation modes and the scale of production of such energy. Experts in this field argue that the only possible way to solve global energy and environmental problems should be based on the further development of nuclear power industry. Nuclear power engineering is not explicitly presented in the list of national priority projects but is included as a constituent element in the Science project and can contribute to the implementation of such projects as Ecology, Education, and International Cooperation and Export. In the context of the Ecology project, power engineering can play a key role in preventing environmental pollution. Within the framework of the International Cooperation and Export project, it allows high-tech export of fast reactors. The experience of interaction with the interested public, developed and implemented professional training programs will ensure the formation of radiation literacy among young people within the framework of the Education project.

### References

1. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Summary for Policymakers. IPCC, Geneva,ьSwitzerland, 2014.
2. Kapitsa P.L. Energy and Physics. Report at the Scientific Session on the 250th Anniversary of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Moscow, October 8, 1975 (in Russian).
3. Ponomarev L.I. The Present Civilization has no Future Without Nuclear Power. Atomnyj Expert. 2018, no. 3-4, pp. 70-75 (in Russian).
4. Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N. Two-Component Nuclear Power System with Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle on the Basis of BN and VVER. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 120, iss. 4, pp. 183-191. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0123-x (in Russian).
5. Shpolyanskaya N.A. Geocryology. Evolution of the Cryolithozone and Global Climate Change: a textbook, electronic edition of network distribution. Moscow. KDU Publ., 2018, 187 p. (in Russian).
6. Nigmatulin R.I. Four «E» of Modernity: Economy, Ecology, Energy, Ethnos. St. Petersburg: SPbGUP Publ., 2015, 60 p. (Selected Lectures of the University. Issue 167) (in Russian).
7. Danilov-Danilyan V.I. Sustainable Development and Endless Discussions about it. Ecologicheskyj Vestnik. 2008, no. 2, pp. 6-13 (in Russian).
8. Forecast of the Development of the Energy Sector of the World and Russia 2016. Ed. by Makarov A.A., Grigoriev L.M., Mitrova T.A. Moscow. INEI RAS-AC of the Government of the Russian Federation, 2016, 196 p. (in Russian).
9. Grachev V.A. Energy Technologies and Sustainable Development. Ecologiya i Promyshlennost’ Rossii. 2019, v. 23, no. 10, pp. 61-65. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18412/1816-0395-2019-10-61-65 (in Russian).
10. Desyatov D.D., Ekidin A.A. Assessment of Tritium Intake into the Environment from NPP Emissions. Biosfernaya Sovmestimost’: Chelovek, Region, Tekhnologii. 2018, no. 1(21), pp. 88-96 (in Russian).
11. Nazarov E.I., Ekidin A.A., Vasiliev A.V. Assessment of Carbon-14 Intake into the Atmosphere Caused by NPP Emissions. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedeniy. Fizika. 2018, v. 61, no. 12-2(732), pp. 67-73 (in Russian).
12. Ekidin A.A., Antonov K.L., Vasyanovich M.E. et al. Radioactive Iodine Release into the Atmosphere during Normal Operation of NPPs. Radiokhimiya. 2019, no. 3, pp. 251-262 (in Russian).
13. Pyrkova A.A., Ekidin A.A., Antonov K.L. Intake of inert radioactive gases into the atmosphere during normal operation of nuclear power plants. Proceedings of the VI International Youth Scientific Conference on the 70th Anniversary of the Ural Federal University Institute of Physics and Technology «Physics. Technologies. Innovations». Ed. by V.Yu. Ivanov, D.R. Bajtimirov. Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation, Ural Federal University n.a. the First President of Russia B.N. Yeltsin. Yekaterinburg. UrFU Publ., 2019, pp. 279-287 (in Russian).
14. Ekidin A.A., Antonov K.L. Application of Specific Index to Estimate Volume of RAW Generation in Normal Operation of Russian NPPs. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2020, no. 2(11), pp. 66-74. DOI: https://doi.org/10.25283/2587-9707-2020-2-66-74 (in Russian).
15. Ekidin A.A., Vasiliev A.V., Vasyanovich M.E. Modern Technologies of Environmental Impact Management as a Tool for Compliance with the ALARA Principle. Biosfernaya Sovmestimost’: Chelovek, Region, Tekhnologii. 2017, no. 2(18), pp. 67-74 (in Russian).
16. Ekidin A.A., Zhukovsky M.V., Vasyanovich M.E. Identification of the Main Dose-Forming Radionuclides in NPP Emissions. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 120, iss. 2, pp. 106-108. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0107-x (in Russian).
17. Gorin N.V., Golovikhina O.S., Abramova N.L., Nechaeva S.V., Matveeva L.G. Methods of Realization of the Initiative of ROSATOM Public Council «Green Square». Proceedings of the VII International Scientific and Practical Conference «Environmental Safety of Mining and Industrial Regions». Yekaterinburg. UGUU, UMC-UPI Publ., 2019, pp. 70-76 (in Russian)
18. Gorin N.V., Golovikhina O.S., Abramova N.L. Nechaeva S.V., Matveeva L.G. Development of the Initiative of ROSATOM: Educational Project «Green Square». Pedagogicheskoe obrazovanie v Rossii. 2018, no. 12, pp. 23-29 (in Russian).
19. Gorin N.V., Voloshin N.P., Shmakov D.V. et al. To the Question of the Formation of Radiation Literacy of the Population. Zdravookhraneniye, Obrazovanie i Bezopasnost’. 2018, no. 4(16), pp. 137-146 (in Russian).
20. Abdrakhimov V.Z., Lobachev D.A., Abdrakhimova E.S. Problems of Environmental Education do not Contribute to the Development of Green Economy. Ecologiya i Promyshlennost’ Rossii. 2016, v. 20, no. 11, pp. 59-63. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18412/1816-0395-2016-11-59-63 (in Russian).
21. Panchenko S.V., Linge I.I., Sakharov K.V. et al. Radiological Situation in the Regions of Rosatom Enterprises. Moscow. SAM Polygraphist Publ., 2015, 296 p. (in Russian).
22. Ilyinykh A.V., Yuzhakova T.V., Makhmutova A.R. Formation of Environmental Image of Nuclear Power Facilities (Based on the Results of Sociological Survey of Chelyabinsk Oblast Residents). Nauchnyj Yezhegodnik. 2018, no. 2, pp. 148-152. Chelyabinsk. Center for Analysis and Forecasting. ChF RANKhiGS (in Russian).
23. Melnikova N.V., Artemov E.T., Bedel A.E., Voloshin N.P., Mikheev M.V. History of Interaction of Nuclear Energy and Society in Russia. Yekaterinburg. Urals University Publ., 2018, 126 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.15826/V978-5-7996-2492-7 (in Russian).