+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-18T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/04.pdf"
first_page="41"
last_page="48"
udc="66.097.8"
title="Experience of Using the Nalco 1392 Scale Inhibitor in the Circulating Water Supply System of the Novovoronezh NPP"
original_title="Опыт применения ингибитора солеотложений «НАЛКО 1392» в циркуляционной системе водоснабжения Нововоронежской атомной электростанции"
authors=["DronovDM", "GontovoyAV", "SarkisyanEN", "KarandeevaNV"]
tags=["scale formation", "circulating water supply system", "scale inhibitor", "Nalko 1392"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.04"

+++

Power industry enterprises use a large amount of water for cooling steam in steam turbine condensers or lubricating oils, gas and air of turbine units. The main requirement for the quality of the cooling water is to ensure a normal vacuum in the condensers. The cooling water must not form mineral and biological deposits in the system as well as corrosion products. Deposits of mineral salts in the condenser tube system, as well as in auxiliary cooling systems, lead to deterioration in heat transfer, significantly decreasing the efficiency of the operating power equipment and requiring periodical flushings of the heat exchange equipment. The raw water used for cooling is commonly taken from nearby bodies of water (large rivers or lakes). Circulating water supply systems are the most common: in these systems, the same water inventory is repeatedly used for cooling, and requires only small amounts of make-up for evaporation losses. Coolers, in this case, are cooling towers, spray pools and evaporation ponds. The water chemistry should ensure the operation of the equipment without damage to its components and loss of efficiency caused by corrosion of the internal surfaces as well as without the formation of scale and sludge. Using the circulating water supply scheme, it becomes possible to most effectively carry out a stabilization treatment program that provides an economical and environmentally friendly mode of operation. In order to inhibit scaling on the heat exchange surfaces of the turbine condenser tubes at Novovoronezh-5, the cooling water was treated with the Nalko 1392 inhibitor. The authors present the results of pilot tests of the Nalko 1392 inhibitor in the circulating water supply system (with a cooling pond).

### References

1. Vlasova G. Peculiarities of operation of water cooling systems of condensers. Energosberezhenie i Vodopodgotovka. 2007, no. 4, pp. 5-6 (in Russian).
2. Vitkovskiy S.L., Danilov A.P., Shchedrin M.G., Kolyagina I.A. Experience in Development of the Design Chemical Technology during Start-Up and Commissioning of the Unit for Production Operation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 172-182. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.16 (in Russian).
3. Golovatenko E.L. Analysis of methods of prevention and removal of calcium carbonate deposition on heating surfaces. Proc. of the International Scientific'Practical Conference «Innovations in Construction – 2018», November 22-24, 2018. Bryansk. Bryansk State Engineering and Technological University Publ., 2018, pp. 166-169 (in Russian).
4. Galanin A.V., Vorobyev S.A., Karandeyeva N.V. Study of salt Inhibitors for Water-Chemical Regime of the Main Cooling Water System with Tower Evaporative Cooling Towers. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost’. 2019, no. S1, pp. 80-84 (in Russian).
5. Ivanova Ya.Yu., Cherkasova T.G. Stabilization Treatment of Circulating and Heating Water. Proc. of the III All'Russian Conference «Chemistry and Chemical Technology: Achievements and Prospects». November 16-17, 2016. Kemerovo. Kuzbass State Technical University n.a. T.F. Gorbachev Publ., 2016, p. 10 (in Russian).
6. Methodological Recommendations on the Use of OEDFK, AFON 200-60A, AFON 230-23A, PAF-13A, IOMS-1 and their Analogues Tested and Certified in RAO «EES of Russia» at Power Enterprises. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293791/4293791005 (accessed Oct. 12, 2020) (in Russian).
7. Kishnevsky V.A., Chichenin V.V. Research of the Carbonate Deposits Processes on the Heat-Exchange Surfaces of the Condensers. Vostochno'Evropejsky Zhurnal Peredovykh Tekhnologiy. 2014, no. 8, pp. 52-58 (in Russian).
8. Agazadeh A.D., Samedov A.M., Hasanov Kh.I., Alsafarova M.E.. Research of Inhibiting Properties of new reagents of salt deposition. Bulatov Readings. Collection of Articles. 2019, pp. 23-27 (in Russian).
9. STO 1.1.1.07.003.0727-2014. Laboratory Chemical Analysis of Waters of Nuclear Power Plants with a Water'Water Power Reactor. Methods of Measurements. Moscow. JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2015, 50 p. (in Russian).
10. MU 1.2.1.16.0104-2012. Methodical Instructions for Preparation of Technical Report on Efficiency and Thermal Efficiency of Nuclear Power Plant Operation. Available at: https://meganorm.ru/Data2/1/4293764/4293764702.pdf (accessed Oct. 12, 2020) (in Russian).
11. Ilyenko A.D., Mironenko A.V., Efimov N.N., Shestachenko I.Y., Larin A.A. Optimization of Operating Modes of Steam Turbine Condensers in View of Cooling Water Cost. Izvestiya vuzov. Severo'Kavkazsky Region. Tekhnicheskie Nauki. 2006, no. 3, pp. 43-45 (in Russian).