+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-18T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/06.pdf"
first_page="60"
last_page="70"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Criticality Control Elements in a Subcritical System with an Extended Plasma Neutron Source taking into Account the Temperature"
original_title="Элементы управления критичностью в подкритической системе с протяженным плазменным источником нейтронов с учетом температуры"
authors=["KnyshevVV", "KarenginAG", "ShamaninIV"]
tags=["plasma neutron source", "thorium hybrid reactor", "control and protection system", "boron", "micro-fuel", "temperature"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.06"

+++

The authors of the article focus on the materials of criticality control elements in a subcritical system with an extended plasma neutron source. The system control elements include a burnable absorber, compensating rods, emergency protection and a maneuvering system.

The purpose of this work is to optimize the effective neutron multiplication factor to a value less than or equal to 0.95, taking into account the temperature rise in micro-fuel with a change in the nuclide composition and accumulation of gaseous compounds in accordance with the operating mode of the subcritical facility with an extended plasma neutron source.

The research was conducted using numerical models and multi-group methods based on the WIMS software package and evaluated nuclear data libraries (ROSFOND, BROND, BNAB, EXFOR and ENDSF).

Boron-containing materials were selected as materials for compensating rods and a burnable absorber, after analyzing the neutron flux density distribution spectrum and temperature rise by ~ 60 – 80°C in micro-fuel during the accumulation of fission products and gaseous compounds. As a burnable absorber, 100 μm thick ZrB2 sprayed onto all fuel cells was selected. B4C was chosen as the material for the compensating rods. One fuel block contains 12 compensating rods with a diameter of 0.87 cm and a protective casing made of stainless steel 10ХН45Ю. The layout of fuel blocks with compensating rods is presented. The calculation was carried out in the 69-group approximation using the equivalent Wigner-Seitz cell and the corresponding boundary conditions. The characteristics of emergency protection are selected and additional protection is provided in the event of a malfunction of the emergency protection rods and compensating rods, in the form of BF3, injected into the coolant. When choosing the materials and design of the compensating system, we took into account the concomitant effects of neutron absorption and temperature effects.

### References

1. Alekseev P.N., Subbotin S.A., Stukalov V.A., Shchepetina T.D. System of Small Nuclear Power Plants as a Factor of National Security. Akademiya Energetiki. 2015, v. 2, no. 64, pp. 74-79 (in Russian).
2. Alexeev P.N., Kukharkin N.E., Udyanskiy Yu.N., Schepetina T.D., Belov I.A., Subbotin S.A., Sedov A.A., Dudnikov A.A., Kashka M.M., Bashaev V.V. Promising Nuclear Power Plants with Fuels on the Basis of Microtvel for Nuclear Ships. Atomnaya Energiya. 2005, v. 99, iss. 1, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
3. Grebennik V.N., Kukharkin N.E., Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N. High'Temperature Gas' Cooled Reactors – an Innovative Direction of Nuclear Power Development. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2008, 136 p. (in Russian).
4. Shamanin I.V. VTGR with Thorium-Bearing Nuclear Fuel: Neutron-Physical Advantages. // Al’ternativnaya Energetika i Ecologiya. – ISJAEE. 2008, no. 11, pp. 48-52 (in Russian).
5. Arzhannikov A.V., Shamanin I.V., Bedenko S.V., Prikhodko V.V., Sinitsky S.L., Shmakov V.M., Knyshev V.V., Lutsyk I.O. Hybrid thorium reactor plant with magnetic trap source of thermonuclear neutrons. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 43-54; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.04 (in Russian).
6. Prikhodko V.V., Arzhannikov A.V. Simulations of fusion Neutron Source based on the Axially Symmetric Mirror Trap for the Thorium Hybrid Reactor. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2020, v. 1647. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1647/1/012004.
7. Kalin B.A., Platonov P.A., Chernov I.I., Shtrombakh Ya.I. Physical Materials Science. Vol. 6. Part 2. Nuclear Fuel Materials. Ed. by B.A. Kalin. Moscow. MIFI Publ., 2008, 604 p. (in Russian).
8. Rusinkevich A.A. Thermodynamic Effects in the Transfer of Fission Products in Microfuel during Deep Burn'Up. Cand. tech. sci. diss. Moscow. National Research Center «Kurchatov Institute» Publ., 2016, 135 p. (in Russian).
9. Bedenko Sergey, Karengin Alexander, Ghal-Eh Nima, Alekseev Nikita, Knyshev Vladimir, Shamanin Igor. Thermo-Physical Properties of Dispersion Nuclear Fuel for a New-Generation Reactors: A Computational Approach. AIP Conference Proceedings, 2019, v. 2101, № 1; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5099594.
10. Anikeev A.V., Bagryansky P.A., Beklemishev A.D., Ivanov A.A., Korobeinikova O.A., Kovalenko Yu.V., Lizunov A.A., Maximov V.V., Murakhtin S.V., Pinzhenin E.I., Prikhodko V.V., Savkin V.Ya., Soldatkina E. I., Solomakhin A.L., Yakovlev D. V., Zaytsev K. V. The GDT Experiment: Status and Recent Progress in Plasma Parameters. Fusion Science and Technology, 2015, v. 68, no. 1, pp. 1-7.
11. Yurov D.V., Prikhodko V.V., Tsidulko Yu.A. Nonstationary Model of an Axisymmetric Mirror Trap with Nonequilibrium Plasma. Plasma Physics Reports. 2016, v. 42, no. 3, pp. 210-225.
12. Arzhannikov A., Bedenko S., Shmakov V., Knyshev V., Lutsik I., Prikhodko V., Shamanin I. Gas-Cooled Thorium Reactor at Various Fuel Loadings and its Modification by a Plasma Source of Extra Neutrons. Nuclear Science and Techniques. 2019, v. 30, no. 12, pp. 1-11. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s41365-019-0707-y.
13. Arzhannikov A.V., Shmakov V.M., Modestov D.G., Bedenko S.V., Prikhodko V.V., Lutsik I.O., Shamanin I.V. Facility to study Neutronic Properties of a Hybrid Thorium Reactor with a Source of Thermonuclear Neutrons based on a Magnetic Trap. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2020, v. 52, no. 11, pp. 2460-2470.
14. MCU Project. Monte Carlo Simulation of Particle Transport Process. Available at: https://mcuproject.ru/rabout.html (accessed Aug. 05, 2020) (in Russian).
15. Hales J.D., Williamson R.L., Novascone S.R., Perez D.M., Spencer B.W., Pastore G. Multidimensional Multiphysics Simulation of TRISO Particle Fuel. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2013, v. 443, pp. 531-543.
16. Degaltsov Yu.G., Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N., Kuznetsov V.F. High'Temperature Nuclear Fuel Behavior during Irradiation. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 208 p. (in Russian)
17. Ponomarev-Stepnoy, N.N., Makarov, V.M., Ivanov, A.S., Belov, I.A., Rusinkevich, A.A., Lindemer, T., McEachern, D., Razvi, J. Evaluation of the Thermodynamics of Deep Burnup HTGR Fuel with Plutonium Kernels. Proc. of the IV'th International Topical Meeting on High Temperature Reactor Technology, HTR 2008. 2009, v. 1, pp. 257-262.
18. Pazirandeh A., Ghaseminejad S., Ghaseminejad M. Effects of Various Spacer Grid Modeling on the Neutronic Parameters of the VVER-1000 Reactor. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2011, v. 38, pp. 1978-1986.
19. Shamanin I.V. Bedenko S.V. Nesterov V.N. Lutsik I.O. Prets A.A. Solution of Neutron Transport Multigroup Equations System in Subcritical Systems. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, v. 4, pp. 38-49; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.4.04 (in Russian).
20. Miller G.K. Stresses in a Spherical Pressure Vessel Undergoing Creep and Dimensional Changes. International Journal of Solids and Structures. 1995, v. 32, no. 14, pp. 2077-2093.
21. Nappe J.C., Monnet I., Grosseau Ph., Audubert F., Guilhot B., Beauvy M., Benabdesselam M., Thome L. Structural Changes Induced by Heavy Ion Irradiation in Titanium Silicon Carbide. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2011. v. 409, no. 1. pp. 53-61.
22. Katoh Yutai, Snead Lance L., Cheng Ting, Shih Chunghao, Daniel Lewis W., Koyanagi Takaaki, Hinoki Tatsuya, Henager Jr. Charles H., Ferrarisd Monica. Radiation-Tolerant Joining Technologies for Silicon Carbide Ceramics and Composites. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2014, v. 448, no. 1-3, pp. 497-511.
23. Heat-Resistant Nickel-Base Alloy, Grade HN55MVTs(VI). Available at: http://www.crism-prometey.ru/science/steel/heat-resistant-alloy-nickel-based-HN55MVTS-VI-for-high-power-plants-withgas-cooled.aspx. (accessed Aug. 05, 2020) (in Russian).