+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-18T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/07.pdf"
first_page="71"
last_page="82"
udc=" 621.039.51.17"
title="Calculation and Experimental Analysis of Integral Experiments with Fast Neutron Spectrum and Models of Sodium- and Lead-Cooled Fast Reactors based on Different Evaluated Nuclear Data Libraries"
original_title="Расчетный анализ бенчмарк-экспериментов с быстрым спектром нейтронов и моделей РБН с натриевым и свинцовым теплоносителем с использованием различных библиотек оцененных нейтронных данных"
authors=["AndrianovaON", "GolovkoYuE", "ZherdevGM", "LomakovGB", "TeplukhinaES"]
tags=["integral experiments", "BFS", "ENDF", "JENDL", "JEFF", "ROSFOND", "ABBN", "database ща integral experiments", "fast neutron reactors"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.07"

+++

The paper deals with a comparative analysis of criticality calculations using a Monte-Carlo neutronic code and the BNAB-93 and BNAB-RF multi-group nuclear data libraries as well as evaluated neutron data files from the Russian ROSFOND library and foreign libraries (ENDF, JENDL, JEFF) of different years. The object of analysis was a set of integral experiments on BFS facilities performed in different years at the Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (60 different critical configurations). The considered integral experiments are included in the base of evaluated experimental neutron-physical data, intended to substantiate the neutronic characteristics of fast reactors (FR) with sodium and lead coolants, to verify the neutronic codes nuclear data, and to estimate the nuclear data component of the uncertainties associated with neutronic parameters of fast reactors. It is shown that the ROSFOND evaluated nuclear data library is a library that minimizes the calculation and experimental discrepancies for the considered set of integral experiments. The authors also present the results of calculating the criticality for the models of fast reactors with sodium and lead coolants based on various libraries of evaluated neutron data and give an estimate of the nuclear data component of the calculated uncertainties. Based on the results of the analysis, a conclusion is made on the directions of further development of Russian nuclear data for fast reactor neutronics calculations.

### References

1. Chadwick M.B., Capote R., Trkov A. et al. CIELO Collaboration Summary Results: International Evaluations of Neutron Reactions on Uranium, Plutonium, Iron, Oxygen and Hydrogen. Nucl. Data Sheets. 2018, v. 148, pp. 189-213.
2. Brown A., Chadwick M. B., Capote R., et al. ENDF/B-VIII.0: The 8th Major Release of the Nuclear Reaction Data Library with CIELO-project Cross Sections, New Standards and Thermal Scattering Data. Nucl. Data Sheets. 2018, v. 148, pp. 1-142.
3. JEFF-3.3 – Joint Evaluated Fission and Fusion File. Available at: http://www.oecd-nea.org/dbdata/jeff/jeff33/ (accessed Mar. 10, 2020).
4. Evaluated Nuclear Data File (ENDF) Database Version of 2019-10-24. Available at: http://www-nds.iaea.org/exfor/endf.htm (accessed Feb. 20, 2020).
5. Zabrodskaya S.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Koscheev V.N., Manokhin V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Pronyaev V.G. ROSFOND – Russian National Library of Estimated Neutron Data. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 2007, no. 1-2, pp. 3-21 (in Russian).
6. Koshcheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Library of group constants of BNAB-RF for reactor calculations and protection. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 93-101 (in Russian).
7. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. BNAB-93 Group Data Library. Part 1: Nuclear Data for Calculation of Neutron and Photon Radiation Fields. VANT. Ser. Yadernye Konstanty. 1996, v. 1, p. 59 (in Russian).
8. Shibata K., Iwamoto O., Nakagawa T. et al. JENDL-4.0: A New Library for Nuclear Science and Engineering. J. Nucl. Sci. Technol, 2011, v. 48, no 1, pp. 1-30.
9. Andrianova O.N., Dulin V.A., Mikhailova I.V., Andrianov A.A. Calculation and Experimental Analysis of Pu, Np, Am, Cm Reaction Rates at Critical BFS Stations. Atomnaya Energiya. 2017, v. 122, iss. 5, pp. 243-248 (in Russian).
10. Andrianova O.N., Dulin V.A., Dulin V.V., Andrianov A.A. Influence of peculiarities of 235U resonance structure on calculated characteristics of critical BFS assemblies with softened neutron spectrum. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 121, iss. 2, pp. 107-113 (in Russian).
11. ICSBEP – International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments. Available at: https://www.oecd-ea.org/science/wpncs/icsbep/handbook.html (accessed Mar. 10, 2020).
12. IRPhEP – International Reactor Physics Experiments Evaluation Project. Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/science/wprs/irphe/ (accessed Mar. 10, 2020).
13. Blyskavka A.A., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Program Complex CON2 SYST/MKKENO for Calculation of Nuclear Reactors by Monte Carlo Method in Multigroup Approximation with Scattering Indicatrices in Pn2approximation: Preprint FEI-2887. Obninsk. SSC RF-PEI Publ., 2001, 28 p. (in Russian).
14. Zherdev G.M., Kislitsina T.S., Nikolaev M.N. The System of Combined Constants ROKOKO – Current State, Results of Testing with the MMK Geometric Module. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 2, pp. 47-57. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.2.05 (in Russian).
15. Andrianova O.N., Zherdev G.M., Manturov G.N., Teplukhina E.S. Some Features of Critical Assemblies Calculation Using Monte Carlo Codes in Group and Detailed Representation of Neutron Sections. Preprint FEI-3288. Obninsk. SSC RF-FEI Publ., 2019, 24 p. (in Russian).
16. Andrianova O.N., Zherdev G.M., Lomakov G.B. Manturov G.N., Teplukhina E.S. Accounting for Heterogeneous Effects in the Preparation of Multigroup Neutron Constants in CONSYST/BNAB-RF. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 4, pp. 58-70. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.05 (in Russian).
17. Golovko Yu.E., Koscheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Tsibulya A.M. Application of the Least Squares Method for Estimation of Constant Error in Calculations of Criticality of Systems with Plutonium. Yadernaya Fizika i Inzhiniring. 2014, v. 5, no. 4, pp. 293-300 (in Russian).
18. Usachev L., Bobkov Yu. Planning on Optimum Set of Microscopic Experiments and Evaluations to obtain a Given Accuracy in Reactor Parameter Calculations, INDC CCP-19U. Viena. IAEA Int. Nucl. Data Committee, 1972, 88 p.