+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-18T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/08.pdf"
first_page="83"
last_page="94"
udc="621.039.546.8"
title="Selecting a Turbulence Model for Calculating the Temperature Profile at the Surface of VVER-1000 Fuel Assemblies in the NPP Spent Fuel Pool"
original_title="Выбор модели турбулентности для расчета профиля температуры у поверхности ТВС ВВЭР-1000 в бассейне выдержки АЭС"
authors=["VoroninaAV", "PavlovSV"]
tags=["natural convection", "model", "turbulence", "laminarity", "fuel assembly", "temperature", "Ansys Fluent"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.08"

+++

The article focuses on the problem of selecting a turbulence model to simulate natural convection at the surface of VVER-1000 fuel assemblies unloaded from the reactor by computational fluid dynamics (CFD) methods. The turbulence model is selected by comparing the calculated data obtained using the Ansys Fluent software package with the results of experimental studies of natural convection at the surface of a heated vertical plate immersed in water, which in the first approximation simulates the lateral face of a VVER-1000 fuel assembly. The most widely-used in engineering practice two-parameter semi-empirical models of turbulence, k-ε and k-ω, are considered. The calculated and experimental data were compared on the excess temperature of the plate surface and on the water temperature profiles in the turbulent boundary layer for convection modes with the Rayleigh number from 8⋅1013 to 3.28⋅1014. It is shown that the best agreement with experimental data with an average deviation not exceeding ~ 8- is provided by the RNG k-ω model, which is recommended to be used in modeling natural convection at the fuel assembly surface.

### References

1. Pavlov S.V. Methodology of Material Science Investigations of VVER Fuel Assemblies and Fuel Elements for Operational Support of New Fuel Introduction at NPPs. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 25-34 (in Russian).
2. Pavlov S.V. Nondestructive Ultrasonic Methods for Investigation of Irradiated Fuel of Nuclear Reactors. Dimitrovgrad. JSC «SSC RIAR» Publ., 2013, 256 p. (in Russian).
3. Ivanov N.A., Bromirsky I.A., Surov D.V., Pervushin L.A., Tishkov A.N., Sementsov A.V., Pavlov S.V., Amosov S.V. Stand for Inspection and Repair of Fuel Assemblies for NPP-2006 Project. Tyazhyoloe Mashinostroenie. 2017, no. 4, pp. 25-28 (in Russian).
4. Voronina A.V., Pavlov S.V. Technique and Program of Calculation of Sound Velocity in Water under Conditions of Natural Convection at the Surface of Fuel Assemblies of Nuclear Reactors. Vestnik Natsional’nogo Issledovatel’skogo Yadernogo Universiteta «MIFI». 2019, v. 8, no. 5, pp. 465-472; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S2304487X19050080.
5. Pavlov S.V., Shalaginova T.M., Mikhaylov S.V., Prokudanov D.L. Study of Natural Convection Effect on the Measurement Results of Geometrical Characteristics of Fuel Elements and Fuel Assemblies by Ultrasonic Methods in spent pools. Preprint. Dimitrovgrad. NIIAR Publ., 1991, 28 p. (in Russian).
6. Raman R.K., Dewang Y., Raghuwanshi J. A Review on Applications of Computational Fluid Dynamics. International Journal of LNCT. 2018, v. 2, no. 6, pp. 137-143.
7. McLean Doug. Understanding Aerodynamics: Arguing from the Real Physics. U.K. Wiley, 2013, 550 p.
8. ANSYS Fluent. Available at: http://www.fluent.com (accessed: Sep. 29, 2020).
9. Vliet G.C., Liv C.K. An Experimental Study of Turbulent Natural Convection Boundary Layers. Journal of Heat Transfer. 1969, v. 92, pp. 517-531. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3580236.
10. Qureshi Z.H., Gebhart В. Transition and transport in a buoyancy driven flow in water adjacent to a vertical uniform flux surface. Int. J. Heat Mass Transform. 1978, v. 21, pp. 1467-1479. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(78)90003-0.
11. Lock G.S.H., Trotter F.J. de B. Observations on the structure of a turbulent free convection boundary layer. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer. 1968, v. 11, pp. 1225-1232. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(68)90193-2.
12. Lecheler S. Numerische Stromungsberechnung. Schneller Einstieg durch anschauliche Beispiele mit ANSYS 15.0. Berlin: Springer, 2014, 278 p.
13. Spalart P.R. Strategies for Turbulence Modeling and Simulation. Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow. 2000, v. 21, no. 3, pp. 252-263. DOI: 10.1016/S0142-727X(00)00007-2.
14. Belov I.A. Modeling of Turbulent Currents. Saint-Petersburg. BGTU Publ., 2001, 107 p. (in Rusian).
15. Spalart P.R., Garbaruk A., Strelets M. RANS solutions in couette flow with streamwise vortices. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow. 2014, v. 49, pp. 128-134. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2014.04.010.
16. Bagaev D.V., Syraleva M.N. Numerical Simulation of Free Convective Flow near a Vertical Heating Surface. Trudy Krylovskogo Gosudarstvennogo Nauchnogo Tsentra. 2018, no. 2, pp. 93-98; DOI: https://doi.org/10.24937/2542-2324-2018-2-384-93-98 (in Russian).
17. Yingchun Ji. CFD Modelling of Natural Convection in Air Cavities. CFD Letters. 2014, v. 6, pp. 15-31.
18. Ziganshin A.M. Posokhin V.N., Romanov S.V. Testing Models of Free and Near-Wall Turbulence in Numerical Solution of the Problem of Convection at a Vertical Heated Wall. Izvestia Vuzov. Stroitel’stvo. 2012, no. 4, pp. 71-79 (in Russian).
19. Bykalyuk A., Kuznik F., Johannes K. Studying the evolution of both thermal and kinetic boundary layers in the vicinity of a vertical conductive gypsum plate under dynamic time-depending conditions at the building scale. Energy and Buildings. 2015, v. 86, pp. 898-908. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.11.010.
20. Ferziger J., Peric M. Computational Methods for Fluid Dynamics. Berlin. Springer, 2002, 431 p.