+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-18T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/09.pdf"
first_page="95"
last_page="107"
udc="621.039.75"
title="Sorption of 90Sr and 137Cs on Clays used in the Construction of Safety Barriers in Radioactive Waste Storage Facilities"
original_title="Сорбция 90Sr и 137Cs на глинах, используемых при сооружении барьеров безопасности в хранилищах радиоактивных отходов"
authors=["VolkovIN", "ZharkovaVO", "KarasevaYaYu", "LysakovaEI", "ZakharovaEV"]
tags["sorption", "cesium", "strontium", "clays"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.09"

+++

The aim of the work was to study the sorption capacity of samples of natural clays with respect to 90Sr and 137Cs to assess the possibility of their use as components of protective barriers at radioactive waste isolation plants. The objects of study were bentonite clays of the Zyryanskoye deposit (Ural) and Desyaty Khutor deposit (Republic of Khakassia) as well as the refractory clay of the Kampanovskoye deposit (Krasnoyarsk Territory).

The sorption capacity of clays by the ionexchange mechanism is characterized by the value of the cation exchange capacity (CEC). In sorption experiments, for all the studied clays, a high degree of extraction of strontium and cesium radionuclides from aqueous solutions was observed. It was shown that the sorption of 90Sr was affected by the montmorillonite content in the samples: bentonite clays absorb up to 98–99% of the initial radionuclide content in the solution, whereas about 80% of strontium is sorbed by the refractory clay. Cesium is almost completely sorbed by the studied samples: the degree of sorption is more than 99%. As a consequence, the highest value of the distribution coefficient was obtained for the sample from the Kampanovskoye deposit (Kd = 5,0⋅103 cm3/g). The methods for fixing the sorbed radionuclides on clay samples were determined by the selective desorption method according to the modified Tessier method. It has been demonstrated that strontium ions are more mobile than caesium ions, up to 97% of which is retained by clays.

Based on the experimental data, it can be concluded that it is possible to use bentonite clays of the Zyryanskoye deposit and Desyaty Khutor deposit as well as refractory clays of the Kampanovskoye deposit as components of protective barriers at radioactive waste isolation plants.

### References

1. Kuleshova M.L., Danchenko N.N., Sergeev V.I., Shimko T.G., Malashenko Z.P. Properties of bentonites as materials to create sorption barriers. Vestnik Moskovskogo Gosudarsnvennogo Universiteta. Ser. 4: Geologiya. 2014, no. 5, pp. 87-95 (in Russian).
2. On criteria for classifying solid, liquid and gaseous waste as radioactive waste, criteria for classifying radioactive waste as special radioactive waste and disposed radioactive waste, and criteria for classifying disposed radioactive waste. Sobranie Zakonodatel’stva Rossijskoy Federatsii. 2012, no. 44, art. 6017, pp. 12445-12457 (in Russian).
3. Obruchikov A.V., Tyupina E.A. Radioactive Waste Management. Moscow. D.I. Mendeleev Rus. Chem. Techn. Univer. Publ., 2014, 188 p. (in Russian).
4. Vasilenko I.Y., Vasilenko O.I. Strontium radioactive. Energiya: Ekonomika, Tekhnika, Ekologiya. 2002, no. 4, pp. 26-32 (in Russian).
5. Vasilenko I.Ya., Vasilenko O.I. Radioactive cesium. Energiya: Ekonomika, Tekhnika, Ekologiya. 2001, no. 7, pp. 16-22 (in Russian).
6. Beckman I.N. Radioactivity and Radiation. Radiochemistry. Vol. 1. Shchelkovo. Markhotin P.Yu. Publ., 2011, 397 p. (in Russian).
7. Varlakova G.A., Ostashkina E.E., Golubeva Z.I. Evaluation of anti-migration properties of materials for the buffer backfill of the near-surface storage of radioactive waste. Radiokhimiya. 2013, v. 55, no. 6, pp. 549-552 (in Russian).
8. Wissocq A., Beaucaire C., Latrille C. Application of the multi-site ion exchanger model to the sorption of Sr and Cs on natural clayey sandstone. Applied Geochemistry. 2018, v. 93, pp. 167-177.
9. Missana T., Alonso U., Fernandez A.M., Garcia-Gutierrez M. Colloidal properties of different smectite clays: Significance for the bentonite barrier erosion and radionuclide transport in radioactive waste repositories. Applied Geochemistry. 2018, v. 97, pp. 157-166.
10. Cherif M.A., Martin-Garin A., Gerard F., Bildstein O. A robust and parsimonious model for cesium sorption on clay minerals and natural clay materials. Applied Geochemistry. 2017, v. 87, pp. 22-37.
11. Tran E.L., Teutsch N., Klein-BenDavid O., Weisbroda N. Uranium and Cesium sorption to bentonite colloids under carbonate-rich environments: Implications for radionuclide transport. Science of the Total Environment. 2018, v. 643, pp. 260-269.
12. Oblivantsev D.Yu., Shcherbakova E.P. Issues of using bentonite as a protective barrier of radioactive waste storage. Gornyj Informatsionno(Analiticheskiy Byulleten’. 2007, no. 1, pp. 116-122 (in Russian).
13. Ilyina O.A., Krupskaya V.V., Vinokurov S.E., Kalmykov S.N. Current state in the development and use of clay materials as engineering safety barriers at the sites of conservation and disposal of radioactive waste in Russia. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2019, no. 4 (9), pp. 71-84 (in Russian).
14. Osipov V.I., Sokolov V.N. Clays and their Properties. Composition, Structure and Formation of their Properties. Moscow. GEOS Publ., 2013, 576 p. (in Russian).
15. Meier L.P., Kahr G. Determination of the cation exchange capacity (CEC) of clay minerals using the complexes of copper(II) ion with triethylenetetramine and tetraethylenepentamine. Clays and Clay Minerals. 1999, v. 47, no. 3, pp.386-388.
16. Polyakov Yu.A. Radioecology and Decontamination of Soils. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1970, 304 p. (in Russian).
17. Bascetin E., Atun G. Adsorption behavior of strontium on binary mineral mixtures of montmorillonite and kaolinite. Appl. Radiation & Isotopes. 2006, v. 64, no. 8, pp. 957-964.
18. Missana T., Garcia-Gutierrez M., Alonso U. Sorption of strontium onto illite/smectite mixed clays. Physics & Chemistry of the Earth, Parts A/B/C. 2008, v. 33, suppl. 1, pp. S156-S162.
19. Wu J. Behavior and analysis of Cesium adsorption on montmorillonite mineral. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2009, v. 100, no. 10, pp. 914-920.
20. Kwong-Moses D.S. , Elliott W.C., Wampler J.M., Powell B.A., Avant D.M. Jr. Sorption and desorption of radiocesium by muscovite separated from the Georgia kaolin. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2020, v. 211, art. 106074.
21. Dronova T.Y., Sokolova T.A., Tolpeshta I.I. Clay Minerals in Soils. Tutorial. Tula. GRIF & K Publ., 2005, 336 p. (in Russian).
22. Konevnik Yu.V., Zakharova E.V., Martynov K.V., Shiryaev A.A. Influence of temperature on the presence of sorbed radionuclides on rocks of the Nizhny Kansk massif. Radiokhimiya. 2017, v. 59, no. 3, pp. 274-279 (in Russian).
23. Tessier A., Campbell P.G.C., Bisson M. Sequential extraction procedure for the speciation of particulate trace metals. Analytical Chemistry. 1979, v. 51, no. 7, pp. 844-851.
24. Krupskaya V.V., Zakusin S.V., Chernov M.S., Tyupina E.A. Features of cesium sorption in bentonite barrier systems for solid radioactive waste disposal. Gornyj Zhurnal. 2016, no. 2, pp. 79-85 (in Russian).