+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-18T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/10.pdf"
first_page="108"
last_page="121"
udc="621.039, 53.05, 53.043"
title="Modeling of Closed Internal Fuel Cycle of a Nuclear Reactor"
original_title="Моделирование замкнутого внутреннего топливного цикла ядерного реактора"
authors=["DrobyshevskyYuV", "StolbovSN", "AnfimovIM", "VarlachevVA", "KobelevaSP", "NekrasovSA", "KorzhenevskyAV"]
tags=["closed internal fuel cycle", "neutron flux control", "thermal neutron separation effect", "SFC – slowing-focusing structure, "deep fuel burn-up"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.10"

+++

Existing nuclear reactors generate up to 15% of the world’s electricity. The reactors operate in the open fuel cycle mode with the initial enrichment of natural uranium in 235U up to 5% and higher.

Enrichment of the fuel in 235U leads to the fact that a large amount of depleted uranium waste is generated in the form of UF6, and the bulk of the uranium mined goes to waste in the form of dump depleted uranium, and then in the form of spent nuclear fuel.

After the loss of 1.5 neutrons for the full cycle of the reactor operation, there are not enough neutrons to produce 239Pu from 238U and efficiently burn the energy of the entire series of formed actinides.


The results of field experimental studies which have proved the possibility of effective control of thermal neutron fluxes are presented and their quantitative evaluation is obtained. A theoretical model is developed which allows quantitative estimation of the effects obtained.

The effect of selective separation of thermal neutrons by means of a moderating-focusing structure fixed on a reactor is important for the development and design of new generation reactors with deep fuel burn-up. The possibility of forming steady-state compositions (operation modes) with positive reactivity and the fullest possible depth of fissile material burnup during operation in a wide range of initial fuel compositions for reactors with circulating fuel in the presence of thermal and fast active zones and a cooling zone for fuel composition curing has been investigated. The possibility of operating such reactors without the need for chemical separation of intermediate actinides, such as 233U and 239Pu, has been instrumentally evaluated. Thus, it is shown that a reactor with a completely closed internal fuel cycle and deep fuel burnup is possible.

### References

1. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. Device for Formation of Directional Flow of Neutrons. Patent RU No. 1821818, 1990 (in Russian).
2. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. Method for Production of Energy in Process of Controlled Nuclear Fission and Apparatus for its Implementation. Patent RU No. 2075116, 1994 (in Russian).
3. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. Method of Controlled Thermonuclear Fusion and a Controlled Thermonuclear Reactor for its Implementation. Patent RU No. 2056649, 1992 (in Russian).
4. Gurevich I.I., Protasov V.P. Neutron Physics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1997, 416 p. (in Russian).
5. Vlasov N.A. Neutrons. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1971, 551 p. (in Russian).
6. Ignatovich V.K. Neutron Optics. Moscow. Fizmatlit Publ., 2006, 335 p. (in Russian).
7. Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Drobyshevsky Yu.V. et al. Registration of the Effect of Selective Separation of Thermal Neutrons. VANT. Ser. Fizika Radiatsionnogo Vozdeystviya na Elektronnuyu Apparaturu. 2018, no. 1, pp. 24-30 (in Russian).
8. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Kobeleva S.P., Nekrasov S.A., Stolbov S.N. Anisotropic Structures for the Concentration of Thermal Neutron Fluxes. Pribory i Tekhnika Eksperimenta. 2020, no. 1, pp. 1-6 (in Russian).
9. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Kobeleva S.P., Nekrasov S.A., Stolbov S.N. Ex-perimental Confirmation of a New Method for Selective Neutron Separation. Nuclear Energy and Tech-nology. 2020, no. 6 (4), pp. 235-241; DOI: https://doi.org/10.3897/nucet.6.60294.
10. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Anfimov I.M., Varlachev V.A., Kobeleva S.P., Nekrasov S.A., Stolbov S.N. Experimental Confirmation of Selective Neutron Separation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 3, pp. 148-159; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.15 (in Russian).
11. Varlachev V.A., Zenkov A.G., Solodovnikov E.S. Features of Neutron-Transmutation Leaching of Silicon on Research Reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 1998, no. 4, pp. 210-215 (in Russian).
12. Dugan E.T., Kahook S.D. Static and Dynamic Neutronic Analysis of a Burst-Mode, Multiple-Cavity Gas Core Reactor, Rankine Cycle Space Power System. Nuclear Technology. 1993, no. 2, pp. 79-92. La Grande Park, IL, US.
13. Gorbachev V.M., Zamyatin Yu.S., Lobov A.A. Interaction of Irradiation with Nuclei of Heavy Elements and Nuclear Fission. Reference Book. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1976, 464 p. (in Russian).
14. Gerasimov A.S., Zaritskaya T.S., Rudik A.P. Handbook on Nucleide Formation in Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 575 p. (in Russian).
15. Kikoin I.K., Dmitrievsky V.A., Grigoriev Y.Y., Bubovsky B.G., Kersnovsky S.V. Experimental Reactor with Gaseous Fissionable Substans (UF6). Proc. of the II-nd Intern. Conf. on the Peasefull Uses of Atomic Energy. Geneva, 1958, v. 2, 528 p.
16. Novikov V.M., Slesarev I.S., Alexeev P.N., Ignatiev V.V., Subbotin S.A. Nuclear Reactors of Increased Safety (Analysis of Conceptual Designs). Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1993, 384 p. (in Russian).
17. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N. Study of Long-Term Dynamics of Fuel Mixture in a Nuclear Reactor with Circulating Fuel. Available at: http://systemwork.ucoz.ru/_ld/0/12___.pdf (accessed Sep. 20, 2020) (in Russian).
18. Bukharin O. Understanding Russia’s Uranium Enrichment Complex. Science and Global Security. 2004, v. 12, pp. 193-218.
19. Costs and Risks of Depleted Uranium from Proposed Enrichment Facility. Science for Democratic Action. June 2005, v. 13, no. 2.
20. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Dunilin V.M., Volkov G.G., Stolbov S.N. Reactor Neutrinos, Neutron Structure and Geometry of Space-Time. Izvestiya Instituta Inzhenernoy Fiziki. 2017, no. 3 (45), pp. 17-29 (in Russian).
22. Drobyshevsky Yu.V., Stolbov S.N., Nekrasov S.A., Petrov G.N., Prokhorov A.K. Method and Device for Neutron Alloying of Matter. Patent RU No. 2514943, 2012 (in Russian).