+++

categories="article"
date="2021-03-18T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/11.pdf"
first_page="122"
last_page="132"
udc="621.039"
title="The Concept of Inherent Safety of Generation V Nuclear Power Plants"
original_title="Основные положения естественной безопасности ЯЭУ пятого поколения"
authors=["SlesarevIS", "AdamovEO", "LeonovVN", "RachkovVI", "OrlovAI"]
tags=["nuclear power", "heavy accidents", "safety", "competitiveness", "self-protection", "fast reactors"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.11"

+++

Elimination of significant risks in nuclear power production is at the present stage a necessity and goal-setting that determine its development in the near future.

Of particular importance is the problem of maximum credibility and convincingly substantiated resistance of nuclear power plants to serious accidents. The lack of clear logic, transparency and guarantees in the reliability of the announced nuclear safety significantly hinders its development, unnecessarily overcomplicating expensive technical solutions and thereby weakening the competitiveness of nuclear energy.

The originally proposed Concept of Inherent Safety set the task of solving the above problems; however, so far its specific content has not been explicitly presented, which allows many competitors to use its terminology to promote projects that are not directly related to the «spirit and letter» of Inherent Safety.

The present paper is intended to fill this gap. The authors also discuss the conditions for the generation and development of new self-protection means for innovative nuclear reactors as well as the phenomenological and technical aspects for their implementation based on the deterministic formalism.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Lopatkin A.V., Orlov V.V., Rachkov V.I., Slesarev I.S., Khomyakov Yu.S. Nuclear Power with natural Safety: Change of Obsolete Paradigm, Criteria. Izvestiya RAN. Energetika. 2016, no. 1, pp. 92-105 (in Russian).
2. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A. Improvement of Nuclear Safety of Fast Reactors by Slowing the Fission Chain Reaction. Intern. Journal of Nuclear Energy. 2014, Article ID 373726, р. 19.
3. Slesarev I.S. Innovative Intrinsically Secure Fast Reactors with Dense Cores. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2007, v. 34, iss. 11, pp. 883-895.
4. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G. On Factors and their Combination Affecting the Intrinsic Safety of a Fast Neutron Nuclear Reactor. Yadernaya Fizika i Inzhiniring. 2015, v. 6, no. 9-10, pp. 442-450 (in Russian).
5. Slessarev I. Paradigm Shift: Vital Risk Free Nuclear Power. J. Nucl. Energ. Sci. Power Generat. Technol. 2013, v. S1; DOI: https://doi.org/10.4172/2325-9809.S1-008.
6. Safety Related Terms for Advanced Nuclear Plants. IAEA-TECDOC-626. Vienna, IAEA, 1999.
7. Spiewak I., Weinberg A.M. Inherently Safe Reactors. Ann. Rev. Energy. 1985, no. 10, pp. 431-462.
8. Wade D. LMR Core Design for Inherent Safety. NEACRP Meeting Procееding. Paris, Sept. 1986.
9. Wigeland R., Cahalan J. Mitigation of Severe Accident Consequences Using Inherent Safety Principles. Proc. of the Int. Conf. IAEA on Fast Nuclear Reactors. Kyoto, Dec. 07-11, 2009, INL/CON-09-15898 Preprint.
10. Nelson E. Quantum Fluctuations. Princeton. Princeton University Press, 1985, 160 p., ISBN 9780691083797.
11. Goldberg A.S. Energy Dictionary. Moscow. RUSSO Publ., 2006, 587 p.; ISBN 5-88721-302-7 (in Russian).
12. Shenfield J. Mathematical Logic. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1975, 527 p. (in Russian).
13. Gordon B.G. Safety of Nuclear Sites. Moscow. National Research Nuclear University «MEPhI» Publ., 2014, 383 p. (in Russian).
14. Bukrinsky A.M. Management of Beyond Design Accidents in Current Russian Regulatory Documents. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost’. 2010, v. 21, no. 1, pp. 16-25 (in Russian).