+++

categories="article"
date="2020-03-18T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2021-01"
issue_name="2021 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/01/12.pdf"
first_page="133"
last_page="142"
udc="621.039"
title="Analytical Model for Determining the Leakage Albedo Component for a Direct Cylindrical Channel Passing through the Nuclear Reactor Protective Layer"
original_title="Аналитическая модель определения альбедной составляющей натекания для прямого цилиндрического канала, пронизывающего слой защиты ядерного реактора"
authors=["KupriyanovKS", "PerevezentsevVV"]
tags=["leakage albedo", "inhomogeneities in radiation protection"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.1.12"

+++

The task of determining the radiation situation, including neutron and gamma-quantum flux density, radiation spectrum, specific volumetric activity of radioactive gases in the air, etc. behind the protective composition having inhomogeneities, has always been important in matters of radiation safety. One of the ways to solve the problem of determining gamma radiation fluxes was to divide the total ionizing radiation flux into four components: line-of-sight, leakage, line-of-sight albedo, and leakage albedo, and obtain an analytical solution for each component. The first three components have been studied in detail in relation to simple geometries and there are analytical solutions for them, but there is no such a solution for the last component. The authors of this work have derived an analytical representation for the leakage albedo component, which, in contrast to numerical methods (such as Monte Carlo methods), makes it possible to analyze the effect of inhomogeneities in protective compositions on the radiation environment as well as to quickly obtain estimated values of fluxes and dose rates. Due to a component-by-component comparison, it becomes possible to single out the most significant mechanisms of the dose load formation behind the nuclear reactor protection, to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of design solutions in the protection design and to improve the protection at significantly lower computational costs. Finally, the authors present calculations for the four components of the total ionizing radiation flux for various parameters of the cylindrical inhomogeneity in the reactor shield. On the basis of the obtained values, conclusions are made about the importance of taking into account the leakage albedo component in the formation of the radiation situation behind the core vessel.

### References

1. Gusev N.G. et al. Protection from Ionizing Radiation. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 512 p. (in Russian).
2. Nikolaev A.I. New Approach to Classification of Heterogeneities and Systematization of Experiments on the Passage of Ionizing Radiation through Heterogeneities in Protection. Preprint FEI-1726. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1985, 12 p. (in Russian).
3. Radiation Protection and Radiation Safety in Nuclear Technology. Proc. of the Xth Anniversary Russian Scientific Conference, September 22525, 2015, Moscow, Obninsk. Under general ed. by L.A. Bolshov. Moscow. Sam Polygraphist Publ., 2015, 142 p. (in Russian).
4. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Khomyakov A.P., Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N. Calculated-Experimental Study of Homogeneous Protections against Gamma-Radiation. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost’. 2015, no. 3 (77), pp. 26-38 (in Russian).
5. Bukhtoyarova E.S., Semenyak V.I. Ionizing Radiation and Radiation Safety. Chrezvychajnye Situatsii: Promyshlennaya i Ekologicheskaya Bezopasnost’. 2015, no. 2-3 (22-23), pp. 27-33 (in Russian).
6. Zinchenko V.F., Romanenko A.A., Figurov V.S., Ulimov V.N. Problems of Radiation Testing. VANT. Ser.: Fizika Radiatsionnnogo Vozdejstviya na Radioelectronnuyu Apparaturu. 2010, iss. 2, pp. 5-7 (in Russian).
7. Memarianfard M.E. Effective Concretes for Biological Protection of VVER-1000-type Reactors. Vestnik MGSU. 2009, no. 2, pp. 131-0135 (in Russian).
8. Mashkovich V.P. Kudryavtseva A.V. Protection From Ionizing Radiation: Handbook – 4-th ed., rev. and suppl. Mosсow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1995, 496 p. (in Russian).
9. Zolotukhin V.G., Zolotukhin V.A., Klimanov V.A., Leypunsky A.I. et al. Radiation Transmission through Inhomogeneities in Protection. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1968, 335 p. (in Russian).
10. Robert C.P., Casella G. Monte Carlo Statistical Methods. 2-nd edition. Springer, 2004. – 683 pp.
11. Sobol’ I.M. Numerical Monte Carlo Methods. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1973, 312 p. (in Russian).
12. Gomin E.A. Status of MCU-04. VANT. Ser.: Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2006, iss. 1, pp. 6-32 (in Russian).
13. RSICC computer code collection. MCNP4C. Monte Carlo N5Particle Transport Code System. New Mexico: Los Alamos National Laboratory, 2000.
14. Leppanen Jaakko. PSG2/SERPENT – A Continious Energy Monte5Carlo Reactor Physics Burnup Calculation Code. Helsinki. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
2015. Available at: http://montecarlo.vtt.fi (accessed Sep. 22, 2020).