+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:22:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file="pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-02.pdf"
first_page="15"
last_page="25"
udc="621.039"
title="Improving the energy efficiency of NPP"
original_title="Повышение энергоэффективности АЭС"
authors=["ShchekleinSE", "TashlykovOL", "DubininAM"]
tags=["efficiency", "coupled parameters of steam", "fire overheating", "waste heat", "heat pump"]
rubric = "Сurrentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.02"

+++

The aim of this work is to analyze and estimate potential ways to improve the energy efficiency of nuclear power.The article describes the currently used and advanced thermodynamic cycles of nuclear power plants. The ways to improve the working fluid parameters in the NPP steam turbine circuit are given. It is done the thermodynamic estimation of the fast reactors NPP thermal efficiency improve by increasing the temperature of the coolant at the reactor core outlet and, accordingly, increase of the temperature and pressure of steam generated by the steam generator. The analysis of the efficiency of utilization of low potential heat from the NPP relief NPP with heat pumps was performed.

Conclusions. The present level of power engineering development, the creation of effective high-temperature gas turbines and steam compressors allow to consider the possibility of achieving higher steam parameters at NPPs with traditional light water reactors without exceeding the permissible operating conditions of cores with cladding of zirconium alloy.

The use of heat pumps in the main steam cooling system in order to improve the economic performance is not efficient. The estimation showed that using of heat pumps in the main turbine condenser circuit allows only to reduce thermal nuclear discharges into the environment.

Disposal of low-grade heat from equipment cooling systems with heat pumps is an effective way to improve the efficiency of the NPP. This decreases the steam extraction from the unit circuit, resulting in an additional energy generation with the same production costs, and also reduces heat emissions to the environment.

### References

1. Asmolov V.G., Semchenkov Y.M., Sidorenko V.A. The appearance of light water nuclear power reactors of the next generation. Proceedings of the VII International Scientific and Technical Conference « Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Power ». Мoscow. 2010, pp. 3-14 (in Russian).
2. Chomenock L.A., Kruglikov P.A., Smolkin Y.V., Sokolov K.V. Determination of the modernization effect of energy power equipment and technological systems of nuclear power plants. Teploenergetika. 2012, no. 5, p. 10 (in Russian).
3. Chomenock L.A., Kruglikov P.A., Smolkin Y.V., Kazarin A.I., Legutenko S.K. Comprehensive optimization of the parameters of the low-grade part of the turbine NPP-2006. Teploenergetika. 2011, no.1, pp. 59-61 (in Russian).
4. Pioro, I.L., Kirillov, P.L., Mokry, S.J., Gospodinov, Y.K., 2008b. Supercritical Water Heat Transfer in a Vertical Bare Tube: Normal, Improved and Deteriorated Regimes, Proceedings of the International Congress on Advanced Nuclear Power Plants (ICAPP). Anaheim, CA, USA, June 8-12, Paper #8333, Pages 10. Special Metals, 2007. Inconel Alloy 718SPF, A Precision Castparts Corp. Company, 16 pages.
5. Stenin V.А. Method of operating a thermal power station: patent RU № 2247840 from 10.03.2005. IPC F01K13/00. № 2003101028/06 14.01.2003 (in Russian).
6. Efimov N.N, Lapin I.А., Malyshev P.А., Popov R.V., Radaev P.N., Cherni A.V., Lemeshev А.А., Karataev G. B., Skubienko S.V., Oshchepkov А.S. Thermal power station: patent RU № 81259 from 23.05.2007. IPC F01K13/00. №2007119246/22 10.03.2009 (in Russian).
7. Tashlykov О.L., Tolmachev Е.М., Semenov М.Y., Sapozhnikov B.G. Snizhenie teplovyh nagruzok AES na okruzhayushchuyu sredu putyom ispol’zovaniya teplovyh nasosov v sheme osnovnogo kondensatora paroturbinnoy ustanovki [Reducing heat loads NPP on the environment through the use of heat pumps in the circuit of the main steam turbine condenser]. Mezhdunarodnyj nauchnyj zhurnal Al’ternativnaya energetika i ecologiya [International Scientific Journal «Alternative Energy and Ecology»]. 2012, no. 3, pp. 16-21.
8. Tashlykov О.L., Kovin I.V., Kokorin V.V. Utilizaciya nizkopotencial’noy teploty AES s reaktorom na bystryh neytronah s ispol’zovaniem teplovogo nasosa [Disposal of low-grade heat from the nuclear reactor on fast neutrons with heat pump]. Mezhdunarodnyi nauchnyi zhurnal Al’ternativnay energetika i ecologiya [International Scientific Journal «Alternative Energy and Ecology»]. 2012, no. 3, pp. 22-25.