+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="03"
file="pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-03.pdf"
first_page="26"
last_page="35"
udc="621.121"
title="The study of ultrasonic reflex-radar waveguide coolant level gage for a nuclear reactor"
original_title="Исследование ультразвукового рефлекс-радарного волноводного уровнемера теплоносителя ядерной энергетической установки"
authors=["Mel’nikovVI", "IvanovVV", "TeplyashinIA"]
tags=["ultrasonic waveguide level", "reflex-radar principles", "acoustic waveguide", "a piezoelectric transducer", "water coolant of high parameters (350°C, 18 MPa)", "nuclear power reactor", "power equipment"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.03"

+++

The results of the experimental study of ultrasonic level gage on the basis of reflex-radar principles have been discussed. It has been is shown that the device operated stably at high temperatures and pressure up to 18 MPa into the water coolant.

The measurable parameter is the running time of acoustic impulses from an emitter to near the surface of coolant and the time of return movement in contrast to well-known waveguide level gages which measure the amplitude of signals.

The waveguide channel consists of two the acoustic insulation waveguides: the emitting and receiver waveguides. The waveguides by zero-order of bending waves and a piezoelectric transducer which work at the frequency about 800 kHz are used. The data processing of receiving signals implements by the electronic scheme on the base of the microprocessor. The accuracy of measurements didn’t more than ±10 mm. The description of the testing unit and methods of the experiment realization was given.

The level gage does not require the correction of signal aspects when the thermo physical properties of the coolant were changed. The device is reserved for the use in heat exchange equipment of the thermal and nuclear energetic.

### References

1. Mel’nikov V.I., Drobkov V.P., Kontelyov V.V. Akusticheskie metody diagnosiki gazozhidkostnyh potokov [Acoustic methods of diagnosis of gas-liquid flows]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 2006, 351 p. (in Russian).
2. Mel’nikov V.I. Volnovodnye acustoimpedansnye urovnemery i signalizatory zhidkosti [The acoustic impedance waveguide level meter and signaling devices for liquid] Nizhnij Novgorod. Datchiki i Sistemy. 2011, no. 12, pp. 6-10 (in Russian).
3. Mel’nikov V.I., Ivanov V.V., Teplyashin I.A., Kiselev Y.A., Sinichin A. N., Belin A. V. Issledovanie perspektivnyh volnovodnyh akusticheskih signalizatorov urovnya vodyanogo teplonositelya YaEU [Study of advanced acoustic waveguide level sensors of water coolant on NPP] Nizhnij Novgorod, Datchiki i Sistemy. 2013, no. 11, pp. 11-17 (in Russian).
4. Djudin B.V., Lependin L.F., Pavluk V.P., Plutenko A.D., Firsov N.P. Ultrazvukovoj urovnemer dlya zhidkosti [Ultrasonik levelmeter for liquid]. Avtorskoe svidetel’stvo RF № 322638. Publ. 30.11.1971. Bulletin № 36 (in Russian).
5. Djudin B.V. Datchik ultrazvukovogo impulsnogo urovnemera [Devices ultrasonic pulse level meter]. Avtorskoe svidetel’stvo RF № 510648. Publ. 15.04.1976. Bulletin № 14 (in Russian).