+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:20:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/04/04.pdf"
first_page="36"
last_page="42"
udc="621.039"
title="The optimization of radiation protection composition"
original_title="Оптимизация состава радиационной защиты"
authors=["TashlykovOL", "ShchekleinSE", "Luk’yanenkoVY", "MikhajlovaAF", "RusskikhIM", "SeleznyovEN", "KozlovAV"]
tags=["radiation protection optimization", "homogenous radiation protective material", "frequency rate of weakening", "research nuclear reactor"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.04"

+++

The aim of this work is to develop an algorithm of design of homogeneous composition of the radiation protective materials (RPM) for the optimization of radiation protection. Used for the investigation were the homogeneous radiation protective materials such as Abris, the production technology of which allows to obtain the desired concentration of fillers. The estimation of weakening ability of radiation protective material containing from 20 to 80% of barite, lead, tungsten, was carried out using high-precision calculation codes. To verify the results of calculations the experimental study of protective properties of Abris material with different concentrations of filling was carried out. Five sources of gamma radiation (60Co, 58Co, 198Au, 54Mn, 24Na) with characteristic energies of radiation were produced in IVV-2M research reactor for the experiment. A specially designed experimental installation and measuring device DKS-AT1123 were used.

As a result of the research it was obtained the calculated dependency of radiation weakening coefficient for specific for different cases radioactive sources for the various compositions and thicknesses of the RPM. These data become initial for the optimization of radiation protection.

Conclusions.
1. The design of RPM of homogeneous composition has considerable potential in the implementation of the radiation protection optimization principle.
2. A comparison oft he results of conducted studies of the gamma radiation dose weakening coefficient with homogeneous radiation protective materials of Abris RZ type depending on the composition and thickness showed that the difference between the experimental data and the values obtained by calculation does not exceed 5%.
3. The technology of production of Abris type homogeneous PRM allows to provide the required protective properties for the specific exposure conditions (composition of radioactive pollution).

### References

1. Russkih I.M., Seleznev E.N., Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E. Eksperimentalno-teoreticheskoe issledovanie organometallicheskih radiacionno-zashhitnyh materialov, adaptirovannyh k istochnikam izlucheniya so slozhnym izotopnym sostavom [Experimental and theoretical research the organometallicheskikh of the radiation protective materials adapted for radiation sources with difficult isotope structure]. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2014, v. 5, no. 5, pp. 449–455 (in Russian).
2. Tashlykov O.L., Shheklein S.E., Bulatov V.I., Shastin A.G. O probleme snizheniya dozovyh zatrat personala AES [About a problem of decrease in dose expenses of the NPP personnel]. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2011, no. 1, pp.55–60 (in Russian).
3. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Chomjakov A.P., Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N. Eksperimentalnoe issledovanie zaschit ot gamma-izlucheniya organometallicheskih kompozicij [Experimental Research Protection against Gamma Radiation of Organic and Metallic Compositions]. Global’naya yadernaya bezopastost’. 2015, no. 2 (15), pp. 49-55 (in Russian).
4. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Chomjakov A.P., Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N. Raschyotno-eksperimentalnoe issledovanie gomogennyh zaschit ot gamma-izlucheniya [Numerical and experimental research of homogenous protection against gamma radiation]. Yadernaya i radiacionnaya bezopasnost’. 2015, no. 3 (77), pp. 17-24 (in Russian).
5. The radiation protection optimization when personnel training monitoring. Safety Report Series, № 21. IAEA. Vienna, 2003.
6. Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N., КоzlovА. V., Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Lukyanenko V.Y., Mikhailova A.F. The investigation of homogeneous protection from neutron radiation // XIV International Conference «NPP Safety and Personell training – 2015»: Abstracts. Оbninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ. 2015, pp. 263-266 (in Russian).