+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="05"
file="/pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-05.pdf"
first_page="43"
last_page="52"
udc="621.039.53; 537.9"
title="The temperature monitoring during the reactor core material irradiation by analyzing the structure of graphite-like boron nitride"
original_title="Мониторинг температуры внутриканального реакторного облучения материалов с помощью анализа структуры графитоподобного нитрида бора"
authors=["IsaevEI", "StepanovVA", "StepanovPA"]
tags=["reactor irradiation", "temperature monitor", "structural studies"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.05"

+++

The materials and components of the advanced nuclear devices are exposed to high dose and high temperature irradiation. In these conditions it is impossible to use methods of the direct temperature determination. Previously a method of reactor temperature determining by analyzing of radiation-induced structure changes in materials was proposed. It was proposed to use high temperature dielectric oxide, nitride and carbide materials as monitors. The possibility of determining the fast reactor temperature by using a series of annealing and analysis of the structure of irradiated boron nitride materials was shown.

In this work it is shown that the reactor temperature determining using a single analysis of the structure of irradiated boron nitride ceramic without time-consuming stage of the post-radiation annealing research is possible. The stationary nano-structural state of boron nitride ceramic occur under high-dose radiation. Such structures depend on the temperature and do not depend on the dose. The temperature dependence of the X-ray line (002) position of radiation-induced stationary phase is obtained. Using this dependence one can determine the temperature in the fast reactor in the range 690-1870 K.

It is shown that the boron nitride ceramic boron contains two structural components. The first component corresponds to a defect-free hexagonal and rhombohedral structures. The second component is strongly deformed nano-crystallites, which contain clusters of vacancy discs. Shifting of Х-lines associated with the second component.

### References

1. Stepanov V.A., Isaev E.I., Kryukova L.M., Plaksin O.A., Stepanov P.A., Chernov V.M. Dielectricheskie monitory uslovii vysokodoznogo i vysokotemperaturnogo reactornogo oblucheniya. Yadernaya energetika. 2015, no. 1, pp. 76-86 (in Russian).
2. Kirsanov V.V., Suvorov A.L., Trushin Yu.V. Protsessy radiatsyonnogo defectoobrazovaniya v metallah.- Moskva.: Energoatomizdat. 1985. 272 p. (in Russian).
3. Stepanov V.A. Svecheniye kaskadov atom-atomnyh soudarenii v kvartsevyh voloknah. VANT Materialovedenie i novye materialy. 2006, iss. 1(66), pp. 54-62 (in Russian).
4. Douglas R., Pisani C., Rortti C. Exact-excheange Hartree-Fock calculations for periodic systems. 2. Results for graphite and hexagonal BN. Int. J. Quant. Chem. 1980, v. 17, no. 3, pp. 517-529.
5. Danilenko V.M., Kurdyumov A.V., Meike A.V. Enerdiya mejsloyevogo vzaimodeistviya i otnositelnaya stabilnost razlichnyh kristallograficheskih modifikatsyi grafitopodobnogo nitride bora. Poroshkovaya metallurgiya. 1981, no. 6, pp. 87-91 (in Russian).
6. Rusanova L.N., Gorchakova L.I. Spekaniye poroshkov nitride bora turbostratnoi structury. Poroshkovaya metallurgiya. 1989, no. 2, pp. 38-42 (in Russian).
7. Dedkov V.S., Ivanov Yu.S., Lopatin V.V., Sharupin B.N. Osobennosti stroyeniya piroliticheskogo nitride bora. Kristallografiya. 1993, v. 38, no. 2, pp. 217-221 (in Russian).
8. Dedkov V.S., Ivanov Yu.S., Lopatin V.V. Nadkristallitnye kvazikristallicheskiye obrazovaniya v nitride bora. Fizika tverdogo tela. 1995, v. 37, no. 2, pp. 297-304 (in Russian).
9. Perfilov S.A., Stepanov V.A., Rusanova L.N., Kuznetsova V.F. Issledovaniye grafitipodobnogo nitrida bora metodom IK- spektroskopii. Poroshkovaya metallurgiya. 1991, no. 2, pp.72-73 (in Russian).
10. Kurdumov A.V., Ostrovskaya N.F., Piljankevich A.N., Frantsevich I.N. Electronno-optocheskoe issledovanie produktov udarnogo czatia nitride bora. Doklady akademii nauk. 1974, v. 215, no. 4, pp. 836-838 (in Russian).