+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:16:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="08"
file="/pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-08.pdf"
first_page="72"
last_page="78"
udc="621. 039.5"
title="The research of feasible temperature modes in the ampoule channel with natural circulation"
original_title="Исследование достижимых температурных режимов в ампульном канале с естественной циркуляцией"
authors=["OsipovaTA", "ValishinMF", "UzikovVA", "PalachyovPS"]
tags=["research reactor SM", "ampoule channel with natural circulation", "research results", "temperature modes of irradiation"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.08"

+++

The current research work provides the results of the calculation analysis of the thin-walled samples cooling during reactor irradiation in a double-hulled ampoule channel with a natural convection supply of the heatsink. Making the ampoule channel in the form of a double-hulled construction enables changing thermal resistance of the channel wall thus regulating heat leak out of it by gas composition and pressure in the cavity between the hulls. The aim of the research is to identify possible regimes of sample cooling in the present channel. The calculation analysis was carried out using the thermal-hydraulic code RELAP5/MOD3.2. In the calculations helium and nitrogen are seen as a gas gap between the hulls. There is a demonstration of the main regularities of changing irradiation temperature regimes in relation to the capacity of energy release in the channel construction materials and the irradiation device, the height of the circulation loop and thermal resistance of the channel hull. Varying the height of the circulation loop and the capacity of energy release in the construction materials enables cooling sample regimes in the range from the temperature of the first contour coolant to boiling temperature at a given pressure (50 – 331°С). Without boiling of coolant on the samples at the maximum (8 m) height of the circulation loop at most 55 kW (14 W/g on the samples) is allocated using helium as a channel cavity gas, exploiting nitrogen – 15 kW (3,7 W/g on the samples); at a minimum (1 m) height of the circulation loop no more than 10 kW (2,5 W/g on the samples) and 5 kW (1,2 W/g on the samples), correspondingly.

### References

1. Serjodkin S.V., Palachjov P.S., Marihin N.Ju., Fedotova D.A., Uzikov V.A., Osipova T.A., Gataullina G.D. Razrabotka metodiki issledovaniya korrozionnogo rastreskivaniya pod napryazheniem splava INCONEL 718 prio bluchenii v reaktore SM [ Methodical Study of Stress Corrosion Cracking of Inconel 718 Alloy in the SM-3 reactor ]. Report on the basic research work carried out in 2013. Dimitrovgrad. JSC « SSC RIAR » Publ. 2014, p. 31 (in Russian).
2. Zvir A.I., Sviatkin M.N., Petelin A.L. Opyt ekspluatacii vysokopotochnogo issledovatel’skogo reaktora SM [The trial of exploitation of the high flux research reactor SM ]. Materialy 11$go ezhegodnogo rossijskogo soveshhanija «Bezopasnost’ issledovatel’skih yadernyh ustanovok» [Materials of the eleventh annual Russian counsel «The safety of research nuclear facilities»]. Dimitrovgrad, 2009, pp. 38-44 (in Russian).
3. Osipova T.A. Primenenie ampul’nogo kanala s estestvennoj cirkulyaciej dlya vnutrireaktornyh ispytanij [The application of an ampoule channel with natural circulation for in-core testing]. 18$ya Mezhdunarodnaya telekommunikacionnaya konferenciya molodyh uchyonyh i studentov «Molodezh’ i nauka» [18th World telecommunication conference of young researchers and students «Youth and science»]. Moscow, 2014. Available at: http://mn.mephi.ru/articles/1110/ (accessed 1 Aug 2015) (in Russian).
4. Samsonov B.V. Tsykanov V.A. Reaktornye metody materialovedeniya [Reactor Materials Methods]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1991, pp.64-71 (in Russian).
5. Tsykanov V.A. Samsonov B.V. Tehnika oblucheniya materialov v reaktorah s vysokim nejtronnym potokom [Technique irradiation materials in reactors with a high neutron flux]. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ. 1973, pp. 204-220 (in Russian).
6. RELAP5/MOD3, Volume 1-7. Codemanual. NUREG/CR-5535 INEL-95/0174, 1995.
7. Babichev A.P., Babushkina N.A., Bratkovskij A.M., Brodov M.E., Bystrov M.V., Vinogradov B.V., Vinokurova L.I., Gel’man Je.B., Geppe A.P., Grigor’ev I.S., Gurtovoj K.G., Egorov V.S., Eleckij A.V., Zarembo L.K., Ivanov V.Ju., Ivashinceva V.L., Ignat’ev V.V., Imamov R.M., Injushkin A.V., Kadobnova N.V., Karasik I.I., Kikoin K.A., Krivoruchko V.A., Kulakov V.M., Lazarev S.D., Livshic T.M., Ljubarskij Ju.Je., Marin S.V., Maslov I.A., Mejlihov E.Z., Migachev A.I., Mironov S.A., Musatov A.L., Nikitin Ju.P., Novickij L.A., Obuhov A.I., Ozhogin V.I., Pisarev R.V., Pisarevskij Ju.V., Ptuskin V.S., Radcig A.A., Rudakov V.P., Summ B.D., Sjunjaev R.A., Hlopkin M.N., Hljustkov I.N., Cherepanov V.M., Chertov A.G., Shapiro V.G., Shustrjakov V.M., Jakimov V.M., Janovskij V.P. Fizicheskie velichiny: Spravochnik [Physical quantities: Reference book]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1991, 1232 p. (in Russian).
8. Kirillov P.L., Yuriev.Y.S., Bobkov V.P. Spravochnik po teplogidravlicheskim raschetam (Yadernye reaktory, teploobmenniki, parogeneratory) [Reference book on thermohydraulic calculations (Nuclear reactors, heat-exchange units, steam-generating units)]. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1990, 360 p. (in Russian).