+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:11:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="12"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/04/12.pdf"
first_page="111"
last_page="122"
udc="621.039.519.4"
title="On the use of solution to the adjoint inhomogeneous transport equation in determining parameters of multiplying media"
original_title="Об использовании решения сопряженного неоднородного уравнения переноса при определении параметров размножающих сред"
authors=["GrabezhnoyVA", "DoulinVA", "DoulinVV"]
tags=["neutron detectors", "method of neutron coincidence", "neutron detection efficiency", "determine the mass of plutonium and enrichment", "effective multiplication factor"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.12"

+++

The measurements to determine the weight of the block and the part of plutonium contained therein 239Pu made were done by the detector AWCC - Active Well Coincidence Counter. The using of a known point model can not determine the value of effective neutron multiplication factor for subcritical block appreciable size or mass and the part they contain 239Pu, because the efficiency detection of the neutrons depends on their production place (spatial effects). Analysis of the measurements for results of double and triple neutron-neutrons coincidence carried out taking into account the spatial effects. The solution of the homogeneous quasi-critical transport equations and the solutions of the inhomogeneous adjoint transport equation were used to clarify the definitions of efficiency detection neutrons as appearing only on the spontaneous fission, and taking into account their multiplication in the blocks at the same time. The value of the effective multiplication factor in the single-core subcritical assembly BFS-73 was determined by these methods and compared with the standard method ORUK, based on inverted solution of kinetics equation. The aim of the work was to determine the preference of these three definitions of efficiency for the analysis of measurement results. It was been shown the unsuitability of the homogeneous quasi-critical equations solutions for the analysis of very deep subcriticalities as solutions of the adjoint inhomogeneous equation does not take into account the neutron multiplication near criticality.

### References

1. Bцhnel K. The Effect of Multiplication on the Quantitation Determination of Spontaneously Fissioning Isotopes by Correlation Analysis. Nucl.Sci.Eng. 90. (1985), pр. 75–84.
2. Peter A. S., Dowell L. J.,Hauck D. K., Henzl V., Henzlova D., Favalli A. Review of multiplicity analysis. LA–UR–05–8866, 2005.
3. Grabeshnoy V.A., Doulin V.V., Mikhailov G.M., Pavlova O.N. The definition of neutrons multiplication of the multiplying media in the deep sub–criticality media using Rossi-α method. Atomnaya Energiya. 2006, v. 101, no. 2, pp.140-148 (in Russian).
4. Doulin V.A., Doulin V.V. The definition of the neutrons leakadge multiplication and fissile mass in the deep sub-criticality media. Atomnaya Energiya. 2009, v. 107, no. 1, pp. 3-9 (in Russian).
5. Bell G.J., Glasstone S. Nuclear reactor theory. Van Nostrand Reinold Company, 1970.
6. Martchuk G.I., Orlov V.V. To the adjoint functions theory. In Neitron physics. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ.,1961, pp.31-34 (in Russian).
7. Reilly D., Ensslin N., Smith H. Passive Nondestructive Assay of Nuclear Matherials. NUREG/CR-5550, LA-UR-90-732, March 2000, pp. 334, 525.
8. Bulanenko V.I., Doulin V.A., Neutron multiplication determination in the plutonium dioxide. In: Seminar Euroatom – Russia – USA. Oct. 2008. Obninsk, IPPE Publ. (in Russian).
9. Smelov V.V. Neutrons transport theory. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ., 1978, pp. 166-176 (in Russian).
10. Alcouffe E.R., Brinkley F.W., Marr D.R. Users Guide For TWODANT: A Code Package For Two-Dimensional, Diffusion-Accelerated, Neutral-Particle Transport, LA-10049-M. Los Alamos National Laboratory, 1986.
11. Kazanskiy Yu.A., Matsusevich E.C. Experimental physics of reactors. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ. 1994 (in Russian).
12. Tsutomu Iijima On the background counts in the Rossi-alpha experiment. Nukleonik, Band 11, Heft 3, 1968, p.157.
13. Doulin V.A., Mikhailov G.M. The determing of correlated background in Rossi-alpha method. Atomnaya Energiya. 1995, v. 78, no. 3, pp. 151-155 (in Russian).
14. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N. and Tsiboulia A.M. BNAB-93 Group Data Library, Part 1: Nuclear Data for the Calculations of Neutron and Photon Radiation Fields, Vienna, IAEA, INDC(CCP)-409, 1997.