+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:10:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="13"
file="pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-13.pdf"
first_page="123"
last_page="132"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental research and testing of pump characteristics with nuclear reactor’s lead coolant"
original_title="Экспериментальные исследования и отработка характеристик насосов на свинцовом теплоносителе "
authors=["BeznosovAV", "LvovAV", "BokovPA", "BokovaTA", "ShikhovDV"]
tags=["heavy liquid metal coolant", "heavy liquid metal coolant", "reactor installation on fast neutrons", "MCP", "pump impeller", "cavitation pump head", "design centrifugal and axial vane-pump system"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.13"

+++

The main circulation pump in the fast neutron reactors operating in specific conditions of the physical parameters of lead and lead-bismuth coolant. Scope last are qualitatively different from those of the thermodynamic characteristics of conventional heat transfer fluids: water and sodium. HLMC cavitation characteristics significantly different from those of other coolants of nuclear reactors.

Used in calculation methods pumps empirical and semiempirical dependences obtained in tests on the water, do not apply these techniques for the calculation and optimal design of pumps, pumping HLMC.

Test models MCP reactor BREST-OD-300 on the stand FT-4 NSTU showed that under the operating conditions of the experiment, inherent to reactor plants with HLMC, recorded a significant difference of actual flow and pressure of the pump and the expected settlement value in the design of the pump in the traditional techniques.

To justify the optimal design of the axial flow pump, pumping fluid into a high-temperature lead NSTU has developed a program of scientific research, the results of the individual steps that are presented in this article.

### References

1. Beznosov A.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Rachkov V.I. Tyazhyolye zhidkometallicheskie teplonositeli v atomnoj energetike [The heavy liquid metal coolant in nuclear power]. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2006. 370 p. (in Russian).
2. Bokov P.A. Issledovanie uslovij vozniknoveniya i harakteristik kavitacii v glavnyh cirkulyacionnyh nasosah reaktorov na bystryh nejtronah, ohlazhdaemyh TZhMT. Dissertaciya na soiskanie uchyonoj stepeni kandidata tehnicheskih nauk [Investigation of the conditions of occurrence and characteristics of cavitation in the main circulation pumps of fast reactors, cooled heavy liquid metal]. Nizhnij Novgorod, 2015. 177 p. (in Russian).
3. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Lvov A.V., Novozhilova O.O., Novinskij E.G., Lemehov V.V. Eksperimental’noe issledovanie uslovij vozniknoveniya i harakteristik gazovoj kavitacii v potoke svincovogo teplonositelya innovacionnyh yadernyh reaktorov na bystryh nejtronah. [Experimental study of conditions for the occurrence and characteristics of gas cavitation in the flow of coolant lead innovative nuclear reactors on fast neutrons]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2012, no. 2, pp. 85-94 (in Russian).
4. Karelin V.Ya. Kavitacionnye yavleniya v centrobezhnyh i osevyh nasosah [Cavitation in centrifugal and axial pumps]. Moscow. Mashinstroenie Publ., 1975. pp. 5-20, 57-79 (in Russian).
5. Beznosov A.V., Anotonenkov M.A., Bokov P.A., Baranova V.S., Kustov M.C. Specifika cirkulyacionnyh nasosov reaktornyh konturov so svincovym i svinecvismutovym teplonositelyami[The specifics of the reactor coolant pumps and circuits with lead and lead-bismuth coolants]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2009, no. 4, pp. 155-160 (in Russian).
6. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Antonenkov M.A., Baranova V.S., Mahov K.A., Bokova T.A. Osobennosti gidrodinamiki svincovogo i svincovo-vismutovogo teplonositelej [Features hydrodynamics lead and lead-bismuth coolant]. Atomnaya energiya. 2010, vol. 109. no. 2, pp. 72-76 (in Russian).
7. Beznosov A.V., Drozdov Yu.N., Antonenkov M.A., Bokova T.A., L’vov A.V., Lemehov V.V. Eksperimental’noe issledovanie protochnoj chasti modeli osevogo glavnogo cirkulyacionnogo nasosa reaktornoj ustanovki s tyazhelym zhidkometallicheskim teplonositelem [Experimental study of flow part of the models of the main circulation pump of the reactor plant with a heavy liquid metal coolant]. Vestnik mashinostroenija. 2014. no. 2, pp. 53-56 (in Russian).
8. Beznosov A.V., Drozdov Yu.N., Antonenkov M.A., Bokova T.A., Lemehov V.V., L’vov A.V. Issledovanie harakteristik protochnoj chasti i podshipnikovogo uzla reaktornoj ustanovki so svincovym teplonositelem [Study of characteristics of flow part and bearing assembly of the reactor installation with a lead coolant]. Trenie i iznos. 2014, v. 35, no. 4, pp. 489-493 (in Russian).