+++

categories="article"
date="2015-12-25T01:09:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="14"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/04/14.pdf"
first_page="133"
last_page="143"
udc="519.87:621.039.5"
title="Degenerate optimization problems and optimality of NPPs"
original_title="Вырожденные задачи оптимизации и оптимальность ЯЭУ"
authors=["KlimenkoAV"]
tags=["degenerate optimization problem", "economy", "power", "electric power system", "power plant", "nuclear power plant", "an optimality", "non-optimality", "rate of discount"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.14"

+++

Optimization of major systems of economy and power leads to degenerate high dimensionality solutions. This very strong mathematical complicating. However it allows to consider the future development of power as teamwork of nuclear power plants (NPPs), power plants (PPs) on coal, PPs on gas. Besides, it allows to consider development of power of the country only on NPPs. System optimization of parameters NPPs is For this purpose necessary.

Rated examinations of optimum systems of high dimensionality have led to understanding degenerate spaces of admissible solutions of economy and power as point sets on the lunar surface pitted by a terminating amount of craters. Locally-optimum solutions of such tasks are given at the bottom of craters. Accounts show, that among equal craters (craters with identical meanings of objective functionals of locally-optimum plans for development of economy and power) meet craters locally-optimum plans for development of economy and power (among other possible heterogeneous combinations of states of economy and energy process engineerings) only on coal and gas PPs; only on coal, gas, nuclear PPs; only on NPPs.

In optimum development strategies of an electric power system sharp transitions from one energy production engineering to other are observed. This consequence of usage in an optimization method of control functions in the form of switching. Such control functions depending on the moments of put of installations of energy production engineering into operation, a placed installed capacity of installations in operation (major or equal to null) is. But so complicated control functions consider all possibilities of optimization. Usage of such control function gives the chance to optimization of the moments of put of installations into operation (and as consequence, switching torques of installations from one mode of operation on other). The model with optimization of the moments of put of installations (power-generating units) into operation displays what more often more favourably to place power-generating units in operation not continuously and annually, and intermittent series (often major) is simultaneous in optimum instants.

Optimality tags PPs are that. PP (in particular, NPP) then it is possible to consider optimum designed when it is included the optimum plan of functioning of an electric power system for an infinite planning interval for a wide gamut of economic situations (from economy with rate of discount of close to null to economy with rate of discount about 30 %/year) in competitive environments with all known types PPs, and there are no reasons, at which it is possible to refine the optimum plan (to refine an optimization objective functional), having changed properties or parameters of this PP. Otherwise, PP (in particular, NPP) it is necessary to recognize this non-optimal.

Problem of system optimization NPP (as well as any PP) in an electric power system – iterative.

If different NPPs (simultaneously jointly) work on any section of a time of the locally-optimum plan it means, that specific (on produced kW·h) profit in the form of the differential rent concrete NPP (the difference between the optimum price of produced energy an electric power system and the cost of production of energy concrete NPP) can differ from that for others together with it working NPPs, but for all it is non-negative. And, for NPP which share in total energy production on this section of a time the greatest, specific profit will be the greatest.

### References

1. Klimenko A.V. Vyrozhdennye zadachi optimizacii ekonomiki i energetiki [Degenerate optimization problems of economics and power engineering]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2015, no. 3, pp. 144-154 (in Russian).
2. Klimenko A.V. Yadernaya energetika, u kotoroj est’ buduschee [Nuclear power which has a future]. Nejtronno-fizicheskie problemy atomnoj energetiki. Sbornik dokladov XXIII mezhvedomstvennogo seminara «Nejtronno-fizicheskie problemy atomnoj energetiki s zamknutym toplivnym ciklom (Nejtronika-2012)» [Proc. XXIIIth Symp. «Neutron and physical problems of atomic engineering with the closed fuel cycle (Neutronics-2012)»]. V 2-ch tomach. Obninsk, FGUP GNC RF-FEI Publ., 2013, v. 1, pp. 107-124 (in Russian).
3. Klimenko A.V. Matematicheskaya model’ optimizatsii energosistemy i eyo primenenie: Monografiya [Mathematical model of optimization of an electric power system and its application: the Monography]. Moscow, NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2010. 292 p. (in Russian).
4. Yadernaya energetika. Problemy i perspektivy. Ekspertnye ocenki [Nuclear power. Problems and prospects. Expert judgements]. Moscow. Institut atomnoj energii im. I.V.Kurchatova Publ., 1989 (in Russian).
5. Reaktornaya ustanovka SVBR-100. [Reactor installation SVBR-100]. Avaiable at www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/ru/projects/svbr100.php (November, 05th 2015).
6. Rachkov V.I., Poplavskij V.M., Tsibulya A.M., Bagdasarov Yu.E., Vasil’ev B.A., Kamanin Yu.L., Osipov S.L., Kuzavkov N.G., Ershov V.N., Ashirmetov M.R. Koncepciya perspektivnogo energobloka s bystrym natrievym reaktorom BN-1200 [The concept of the perspective power unit with fast sodium reactor BN-1200]. Atomnaya energiya. 2010, v. 108, no. 4, pp. 201-206 (in Russian).
7. Belaya kniga yadernoj energetiki [The white book of nuclear power]. Pod obschej redakciej prof. E.O. Adamova. Moscow, GUP NIKIET Publ., 1998 (in Russian).
8. Pivovarov V.A. Odnokonturnyj kipyaschij reactor dlya zamknutogo toplivnogo cikla. Optimal’nyj variant [One-circuit boiling water reactor for the closed fuel cycle. Optimum variant]. Moscow, REA. 2009, no. 9, pp. 37-41 (in Russian).
9. Ponomarev L.I., Gulevich A.V., Zemskov E.A., Seliverstov V.V., Konev V.N., Degtyarev A.M., Karmanov F.I., Sidorkin S.F., Myasnikov A.A., Fejnberg O.S., Gladush G.G., Fursov B.I., Seregin M.B., Kuznetsov A.Yu., Lizin A.A. Obosnovanie strategii transmutacii minornyh aktinidov (MA) v zamknutom yadernom toplivnom cikle [Substantiation of the strategy of a transmutation of minor actinides (MA) in the closed nuclear fuel cycle]. Otchyot Avtonomnoj nekommercheskoj organizacii «Koordinacionnyj issledovatel’skij centr po probleme myuonnogo kataliza i ekzoticheskikh kvantovyh system (ANO MUCATEX)». Inv. no. 02/NIR-10.12.2010. No. gosregistracii 01201065196. Moscow, 2010 (in Russian).
10. The Future of Nuclear Power. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003.
11. Update on the Cost of Nuclear Power by Yangbo Du and John E. Parsons. 09-004, May
2009. Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research. A Joint Center of the Department of Economics, MIT Energy Initiative, and Sloan School of Management.
12. The Future of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. An Interdisciplinary MIT Study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011.
13. Klimenko A.V. Mozhet li yadernaya energetika stat’ konkurentosposobnoj na svobodnom rynke energii [Whether there can be a nuclear power to competitive energy in the free market]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 17-28. (in Russian).
14. Shevelev Y.V., Klimenko A.V. Effektivnaya ekonomika yadernogo toplivno-energeticheskogo kompleksa [Effective economics of the nuclear fuel and energy complex]. Moscow, RGGU Publ., 1996. 736 p. (in Russian).
15. Orlov V.V. Ekonomicheskie kriterii effektivnosti ispol’zovaniya yadernogo goryuchego v reaktorakh. Preprint FEI-286. [Economic criteria of efficiency of usage of nuclear fuel in reactors. IPPE Preprint-286]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1971. 18 p. (in Russian).