+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="15"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Prospects of creation of the dual component nuclear energy system"
original_title="Перспективы создания двухкомпонентной ядерной энергетической системы"
authors=["PetrovAYu", "ShutikovАV", "Ponomarev-StepnoyNN", "BezzubtzevVS", "BakanovMV", "TroyanovVM"]
tags=["dual component nuclear energy system", "centralized nuclear fuel cycle", "industrial power complex from the supplier (Rosatom)"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.01"

+++

Nuclear power of the future will be represented by a dual component energy system dominated by VVER reactors with gradually increasing proportion of sodium fast reactors SFR, joint with a singular closed MOX fuel nuclear cycle.
The components of such system play the following parts.
1. Reactors SFR:
– Base-load production of power; assumes power manoeuvrability within the limits of 100 – 75 – 100%;
– Utilizes accumulated depleted or reprocessed uranium for refuelling, produces plutonium most suitable for manufacturing MOX fuel for VVER;
– Burns up long-life high-level waste (minor actinides partitioned during reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel from SFR and VVER).
2. Reactors VVER:
– Produces power according to the system power manoeuvrability mode;
– Uses MOX fuel instead of UO2;
– Exported with the option of returning SNF back to Russia;
– Plutonium extracted from VVER spent fuel is used for MOX fuel manufacturing for SFR.
3. Nuclear fuel cycle industries:
– Provide reprocessing of SNF from VVER and SFR, extracting of nuclear materials for recycling;
– Use depleted or reprocessed uranium and plutonium from spent nuclear fuel to manufacture MOX fuel;
– Provide partitioning of RAW in order to consequently utilize minor actinides and reduce the risk of proliferation of nuclear materials; conditioning and disposal of RAW.
This article presents several ways of establishing the dual component system with CNFC, as well as the new business approach to rendering CNFC services to foreign investors.

### References

1. Shutikov A.V. The prospects of creation of twocomponent nuclear power system – a look of the Russian customer. ATOMEKSPO 2017, Round table: «Innovative technology solutions on life cycle of nuclear power as a condition of sustainable development» Moscow, on June 19, 2017 (in Russian).
2. Petrov A.Yu. A role and the place of operating organization in implementation of the strategy of development of nuclear power industry of Russia. The XI International scientific and technical conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economy of Nuclear Power» (MNTK-2018). Moscow, on May 23, 2018. Available at: mntk.rosenergoatom.ru/mediafiles/u/files/2018/…/Petrov_A.Yu._MNTK_2018.pdf (accessed May 12, 2019) (in Russian).
3. Klinov D.A., Gulevich A.V., Bakanov M.V., Troyanov V.M. Twocomponent nuclear power with the closed fuel cycle and a role of reactors on thermal and fast neutrons. The XI International scientific and technical conference «Safety, Efficiency and Economy of Nuclear Power» (MNTK-2018). Moscow, on May 23, 2018. Available at: mntk.rosenergoatom.ru/mediafiles/u/files/2018…/Gulevich_A._MNTK_2018.pdf (accessed May 12, 2019) (in Russian).
4. Alekseev P.N., et al. Twocomponent nuclear power system with thermal and fast reactors in the closed nuclear fuel cycle. Ed. by the academician of RAS Ponomarev-Stepny N.N. Мoscow. Tekhnosfera Publ., 2016, 160 p. ISBN 978-5-94836-434-6 (in Russian).
5. The order of the Government of the Russian Federation of June 9, 2017 No. 1209-r about the approval of the General scheme of placement of power generation facilities till 2035. Available at: static.government.ru/media/files/zzvuuhfq2f3OJIK8AzKVsXrGIbW8ENGp.pdf (accessed May 12, 2019) (in Russian).
6. Zhang Dong Hui. Research, development and deployment of fast reactors and related fuel cycle in China. Proc. of the Intern. Conf. «Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17)». Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 26-29 June 2017. STI / PUB / 1836 ¦ 978-92-0-108618-1.
7. Pivet S. Status of the French Fast Reactor Programme. In Proc. of the Intern. Conf. «Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17)». Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 26-29 June 2017. STI / PUB /1836 ¦ 978-92-0-108618-1.
8. Laugier F. Strategy for twocomponent NP fleet: PWR and SFR. «Feedback experience on SFR REA-EDF Seminar». Beloyarsk NPP, April 25th, 2019.
9. Bhaduri A.K., Puthiyavinayagam P. Indian Fast Reactor Programme: Status and R-D Achievements. Proc. of the Intern.Conf. «Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17)». Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 26-29 June 2017. STI / PUB / 1836 ¦ 978-92-0-108618-1.
10. Sagayama Y. Current Status and Future View of the Fast Reactor Cycle Technology Development in Japan. Proc. of the Intern.Conf. «Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17)». Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 26-29 June 2017 STI / PUB / 1836 ¦ 978-92-0-108618-1.
11. Heidet F. Current status of the VTR core design.Proc. of the Intern. Conf. RRFM 2019, March 24-28, 2019. Available at: https://www.euronuclear.org/meetings/rrfm2019/index.htm (accessed May 12, 2019).