+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/02.pdf"
first_page="16"
last_page="28"
udc="621.039"
title="Problems of nuclear-laser power engineering and methods of their solution"
original_title="Проблемы ядерно-лазерной энергетики и способы их решения"
authors=["DyachenkoPP", "ZrodnikovAV", "KukharchukOF", "SuvorovAA"]
tags=["nuclear reactor", "neutrons", "fission fragments", "nuclear pumping", "laser", "optical quantum amplifier with nuclear pumping"]
rubric = "Сurrentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.02"

+++

In the mid-1980s, the concept of a high power reactor-laser system based on a nuclear pumped optical quantum amplifier (OKUYaN was formulated at IPPE. Its essence lies in the fact that a wide-aperture OKUYaN serves as an amplifier in the well-known «master laser – two-pass amplifier with phase conjugation» scheme.

The structure of such an amplifier includes a system of two neutron-coupled units: an ignition reactor (RB) and a laser (LB). The ignition unit is a compact multi-core pulsed fast neutron reactor. The laser unit operates on thermal neutrons and, in the neutron-physical relation, is a subcritical booster zone of the ignition reactor.

To substantiate the basic principles of the OKUYaN concept and to prove the possibility of its practical implementation, as well as to verify the calculation codes and to work out the element base, а unique unparalleled in the world reactor-laser complex with a demonstration sample of a pulsed reactor-laser system based on OKUYaN (stand «B») was created and put into operation at IPPE in 1999.

This article discusses the problems of developing and creating the stand «B», the choice and justification of the neutron-physical and laser characteristics of the OKUYaN demonstration sample. Provided are the results of a detailed computational-experimental study of the demonstration sample characteristics, the data from system studies of the direct conversion of nuclear fission energy into laser radiation energy in complex reactor-laser devices and the results of considering the prospects for the development of nuclear-laser power engineering.

### References

1. Gulevich A.V., Dyachenko P.P., Zrodnikov A.V., Kukharchuk O.F. Coupled Pulsed Reactor System. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2003 (in Russian).
2. Karelin A.V. Physical Basis of Reactor5Laser. Moscow. FGUP «NPP VNIIEM» Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
3. Melnikov S.P., Sizov A.N., Sinyanskii A.A. Nuclear Pumping Lasers. Sarov. «RFNC-VNIIEF» Publ., 2008 (in Russian).
4. Melnikov S.P., Sizov A.N., Sinyanskii A.A., Miley G.H.. Lasers with Nuclear Pumping. Springer Science + Business Media (New York), 2015. – 455 p. [1 Russian Federal Nuclear Center – All Russian Scientific	Research Institute of Experimental Physics. Sarov, Nizhniy Novgorod reg., Russia. 2 University of Illinois, Urbana, USA].
5. Prelas Mark. Nuclear Pumped Lasers. Q Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 2016, 417 p.
6. Walters R., Schneider R., Borland R. Nuclear Pumped Laser Reactors. Trans. ANS. 1979, v. 31, p.742.
7. McArthur D.A., Shmidt Th.R., Tolefsrud Ph.B. Concepts for Construction of Large Reactor Exited Laser Systems. SAND 76-0584. 1977.
8. Dyachenko P.P. Background in the Field of Nuclear Energy into Laser Energy Direct Conversion. In: «State Scientific Centre of The Russian Federation – Institute for Physics and Power Engineering, 50 years». Obninsk. GNTs RF	FEI Publ., 1996, p. 40 (in Russian).
9. Dyachenko P.P., Elovskiy O.A., Prokhorov Ya.A., Fokin G.N., Yakubov P.A., Snopkov A.A. Reactor	Laser Facility «Set B». Atomnaya Energiya. 2000, v. 88, iss. 5, pp. 337	342 (in Russian).
10. Dyachenko P.P., Fokin G.N. Reactor5Laser System with Direct Fission Fragments Pumping. Patent RU 2502140 C1, 2012 (in Russian).
11. Dyachenko P.P., Seregina E.A., Tikhonov G.V. Active Material for Liquid Lasers and Amplifiers. Patent RU 2075143 C1, 1997 (in Russian).
12. Levakov B.G., Lukin A.V., Magda E.P., Pogrebov I.S., Snopkov A.A., Terekhin V.A. Pulsed Nuclear Reactors of RFNC5VNIITF. Snezhinsk. RFNC	VNIITF Publ., 2002 (in Russian).
13. Dyachenko P.P. Status of the SSC IPPE n.a. A.I. Leypunsky Investigations for Nuclear Energy into Laser Energy Direct Conversion. Proc. of the Int. Conference «Nuclear Pumping Lasers Problems and Nuclear Pulsed Reactors». Snezhinsk. RFNC	VNIITF Publ., 2003, pp. 5	 30 (in Russian).
14. Dyachenko P.P., Fokin G.N. Driver Nuclear Reactor and Pumping Pulse Parameters in Reactor	Laser System. Atomnaya energiya. 2012, v. 112, iss. 5, pp. 277	282 (in Russian).
15. Seifritz W., Wydler P. Criticality of Neptunium	237 and its Possible Utilization in Nuclear Reactors. Nucl. Sci. Engng. 1979, v. 72, no. 2, pp. 272	276.
16. Konev V.N. Neptunium5237. Behaviour, Structure of the Alloys and Chemical Compounds. Preprint No 11 (68). Moscow. VNIIEM Publ., 1981 (in Russian).
17. Kolesov V.F. Aperiodic Pulsed Reactors. Sarov. RFNC	VNIIEF Publ., 1999 (in Russian). Monograph (Vol. 1, 2). Revised and additional edition. Sarov. RFNC	VNIIEF Publ., 2007 (in Russian).
18. Shabalin E.P., Aksenov V.L., Komyshev G.G., Rogov A.D. Highly Intense Pulsed Neutron Source Based on Neptunium. Atomnaya Energiya. 2018, v. 124, no. 6, pp. 309	313 (in Russian).
19. Dyachenko P.P., Dyachenko N.P., Poletaev E.D. Influence of the Active Element Diameter and Uranium Coating 1) Thickness on Gas Nuclear Pumping Laser Efficiency. Atomnaya Energiya. 2015, v. 118, iss. 4, pp. 183	187 (in Russian).
20. Denezhkin I.A., Dyachenko P.P., Stepanov S.P. Generation Characteristics of Cadmium Laser with Fission Fragments Extraction. Proc. of the Conference «Pulsed Reactors: Creation History and Use Prospects». Sarov. VNIIEF Publ., 2015, v. 2, pp.129	132 (in Russian).
21. Denezhkin I.A., Dyachenko P.P., Stepanov S.P. Characteristics of the Cadmium Vapor Nuclear Pumping Laser Active Element. Atomnaya energiya, 2019 (under publication, in Russian).
22. Lapidus V.I., Dobrovol’skii A.F., Dyachenko P.P., Seregina E.A., Tikhonov G.V. Pumping Efficiency and Lifetime of the 4F3/2 Level of a Neodymium Ion in a Liquid Nd3+: POCl3– SnCl4– UO22+ Laser	Active Medium upon Pulsed Irradiation by Fission Fragments in a BARS	6 Reactor. Kvantovaya Electronika. 2003, v. 33, iss. 6, pp. 507	510 (in Russian).
23. Dyachenko P.P., Kulikov P.A., Seregina E.A., Seregin A.A., Tikhonov G.V. Laser Beam Transmission by Neodymium and Uranyl Activated Inorganic Liquid upon Pulsed Irradiation by Uranium Fission Fragments. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 121, iss. 6, pp. 350	356 (in Russian).