+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/04.pdf"
first_page="43"
last_page="54"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Hybrid thorium energy producing subcritical stand with a fusion neutron source based on a magnetic trap"
original_title="Гибридная ториевая реакторная установка с источником термоядерных нейтронов на основе магнитной ловушки"
authors=["ArzhannikovAV", "ShamaninIV", "BedenkoSV", "PrikhodkoVV", "SinitskySL", "ShmakovVM", "KnyshevVV", "LutsikIO"]
tags=["plasma neutron source", "thorium hybrid reactor", "nuclear fuel evolution"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.04"

+++

The article presents computer-simulated neutron-physical processes occurring in a high-temperature gas-cooled thorium reactor for 30 different core loading options. To ensure the reactor reliable and long-term operation (for at least 7 years), the dispersed phase proportion and the fuel starting composition were selected. The parameters are given of a long magnetic trap with a high-temperature plasma, ensuring the generation of additional neutrons due to fusion reactions occurring in the plasma and due to (n, xn)-type reactions occurring on the outer surface of magnetic trap. It is also shown that it is principally possible to replace the near-axial region of the reactor core by a long magnetic trap with high-temperature plasma for the cases of D-D and D-T reactions. The spatial-energy distribution of the output of these neutrons on the outer surface of the magnetic trap has been obtained. The prospects of using a plasma D-T neutron source to modify the near-axial region of the reactor core are demonstrated.

The considered reactor with a near-axial source of additional neutrons is designed to study the thermophysical and neutron-physical characteristics of the dispersive thorium-plutonium fuel in order to improve its properties. The obtained results are of interest in terms of advancing to future fusion power through the creation of a hybrid technology based on a thorium reactor with a source of additional neutrons in the form of a long plasma column. Calculation models were created using verified calculation program codes, including WIMS-D5B (ENDF/B-VII.0), MCU5TPU (MCUDВ50), MCNP5 (ENDF/B-VII.0), Serpent 1.1.7 (ENDF/B-VII.0), and PRIZMA (ENDF/B-VII.I).

### References

1. Shamanin I.V., Grachev V.M., Chertkov Y.B., Bedenko S.V., Mendoza O., Knyshev V.V. Neutronic properties of high-temperature gas-cooled reactors with thorium fuel. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2018, v. 113, pp. 286-293.
2. Shamanin I., Bedenko S., Chertkov Y., Gubaydulin I. Gas-Cooled Thorium Reactor with Fuel Block of the Unified Design. Advances in Materials Science and Engineering. 2015, v. 2015, pp. 1-8.
3. Shamanin I.V., Bedenko S.V., Chertkov Yu.B. Thorium-loaded low-power reactor installation operated with super-long fuel residence time. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, v. 2016, no. 2, pp. 121-132 (in Russian).
4. Arzhannikov A.V., Anikeev A.B., Beklemishev A.D., Ivanov A.A., Shamanin, I.V., Dyachenko, A.N., Dolmatov O.Yu. Subcritical Assembly with Thermonuclear Neutron Source as Device for Studies of Neutron-physical Characteristics of Thorium Fuel. AIP Conference Proceedings. 2016, v. 1771, no. 090004.
5. Beklemishev A., Anikeev A., Astrelin V., Bagryansky P., Burdakov A., Davydenko V., Gavrilenko D., Ivanov A., Ivanov I., Ivantsivsky M., Kandaurov I., Polosatkin S., Postupaev V., Sinitsky S., Shoshin A., Timofeev I., Tsidulko Y. Novosibirsk Project of Gas-Dynamic Multiple-Mirror Trap. Fusion Science and Technology. 2013, v. 63 (1T), pp. 46-51.
6. Anikeev A.V., Bagryansky P.A., Beklemishev A.D., Ivanov A.A., Korobeinikova O.A., Kovalenko Yu.V., Lizunov A.A., Maximov V.V., Murakhtin S.V., Pinzhenin E.I., Prikhodko V.V., Savkin V.Ya., Soldatkina E.I., Solomakhin A.L., Yakovlev D.V., Zaytsev K.V. The GDT Experiment: Status and Recent Progress in Plasma Parameters. Fusion Science and Technology. 2015, v. 68 (1), pp. 1-7.
7. Yurov D.V., Prikhodko V.V., and Tsidulko Yu.A. Nonstationary model of an axisym-metric mirror trap with nonequilibrium plasma. Plasma Physics Reports. 2016, v. 42(3), pp. 210-225.
8. Moir R.W., Martovetsky N.N., Molvik A.W., Ryutov Dimitri, and Simonen T.C. Mirror-based hybrids of recent design. AIP Conference Proceedings. 2012, v. 1442, pp. 43-54.
9. Bedenko S.V., Knyshev V.V., Kuznetsova M.E., Shamanin I.V. Peculiarities of residual radiation formation of disperse microencapsulated nuclear fuel. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 3, pp. 75-87 (in Russian).
10. Nuclear Energy Agency. Computer Programs NEA+1507 WIMSD5. WIMSD5, Deterministic Multigroup Reactor Lattice Calculations. Available at: http://www.oecd-nea.org/tools/abstract/detail/nea-1507/ (accessed Jan 05, 2019).
11. MCU Project. Monte Carlo modelling of particle transport. Available at: https:// mcuproject.ru/rabout.html (accessed Jan 05, 2019) (in Russian).
12. Kulikov G.G., Kulikov E.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A. Protactinium-231 – new burnable neutron absorber. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 195-204 (in Russian).
13. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kurnaev V.A., Apse V.A. Hybrid Fusion-Fission Reactor with a Thorium Blanket: Its Potential in the Fuel Cycle of Nuclear Reactors. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, no. 10, pp. 1100-1111.
14. Hussain A., Xinrong C. Small PWR core design with coated particle based fuel with a novel composition. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2010, v. 52 (6), pp. 531-535.
15. Abagyan L.P., Bazazyants N.O., Nikolaev M.N., Tsiboulya A.M. New Group Constant System to Calculate Fast Reactors. Atomnaya Energiya, 1980, v. 48, iss. 2, pp. 117-118 (in Russian).
16. MCNP. Monte Carlo N+Particle Transport Code. Available at: https://mcnp.lanl.gov/ (accessed Jan 05, 2019).
17. Leppaanen J., Pusa M., Viitanen T., Valtavirta V., Kaltiaisenaho T. The Serpent Monte Carlo code: Status, development and applications in 2013. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2015, v. 82, pp. 142-150.
18. Kandiev Yu.Z., Kashaeva E.A., Khatuntsev K.E., Kuropatenko E.S., Lobanova L.V., Lukin G.N., Malakhov A.A., Malyshkin G.N., Modestov D.G., Mukhamadiev R.F., Orlov V.G., Samarin S.I., Serova E.V., Spirina S.G., Vakhonina T.V., Voronina N.A., Zatsepin O.V. PRIZMA status. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2015, v. 82, pp. 116-120.