+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/06.pdf"
first_page="67"
last_page="79"
udc="621.039.50"
title="A research of VVER-1200 reactor core control algorithms for implementation of flexible (load tracing) operating modes"
original_title="Исследование алгоритмов управления ЯЭУ с ВВЭР-1200 для реализации суточных маневренных режимов на АЭС"
authors=["VygovskiySB", "AlMalkawiRT", "KhachatryanAG"]
tags=["VVER-1200", "offset-power phase diagram", "axial offset (AO)", "automated power controller (APC)", "control algorithm", "water exchange"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.06"

+++

Results of numerical studies of algorithms for controlling spatial distribution of neutron field in VVER-1200 reactor core operated inflexible daily reactor load adjustment modes are provided in the present paper. Possibility was demonstrated of automated control of axial offset of neutron power using one of the control groups for the purpose of removing the psychological stress on operational personnel of nuclear power plants in flexible reactor power load adjustment regimes. This allows as well additionally minimizing water exchange while retaining all nuclear safety parameters in the reactor core. Research was carried out using the PROSTOR software complex currently applied by the Novovoronezh NPP training center for conducting training sessions in optimal control algorithms for power unit operation in maneuvering modes for operational personnel of nuclear power plants. The methodology is suggested for adjustment of parameters of offset control depending on the neutronic characteristics of the reactor core. The expediency of the conducted study is explained by the fact that testing maneuvering daily NPP operating modes with reactor power load varying within wide range is planned under the NPP-2006 project to be conducted in Russia on the Novovoronezh NPP-2 and Leningrad NPP-2 power units. Implementation of such testing is necessary for verification of operability of power units in maneuvering daily modes for a number of contracts with foreign partners concluded by the RF and for enhancing competitiveness of VVER NPP equipment abroad.

### References

1. Aver’yanova S.P., Vohmyanina N.S., Zlobin D.A., Filimonov P.E., Kuznecov V.I., Lagovskij V.B. Offset-Power Phase Diagram Method to Control the Energy Release of the Reactor. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 121, no. 3, pp. 123-127 (in Russian).
2. Aver’yanova S.P., Lunin G.L., Proselkov V.N. Control of Local Linear Power of Fuel Rods in the VVER-1000 Core Using Offset Power Diagram. Atomnaya Energiya. 2002, v. 93, no. 1, pp. 13-18 (in Russian).
3. Filimonov P.E. VVER Power Distribution Control Using Offset-Offset Diagram. Atomnaya Energiya. 1992, v. 73, no. 3, pp. 175-179 (in Russian).
4. Aver’yanova S.P., Dubov A.A, Kosourov K.B., Filimonov P.E. Temperature Regulation and Maneuverability of VVER-1000]. Atomnaya Energiya. 2010, v. 109, no. 6, pp. 198-202 (in Russian).
5. Bedenko S. V., Nesterov V. N., SHamanin I. V. Basics of Neutron Field Control in Nuclear Reactors. Tomsk. TPU Publ., 2009, 176 p. (in Russian).
6. Ignatenko E.I., Pytkin YU.N. The Maneuverability of the VVER Reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1985, 88 p. (in Russian).
7. Kosourov K.B., Paplov V.I., Aver’yanova S.P., Aleshin S.S. Development of the Technical Project of NPP-2006. Scientific Report. Inv. No 32/1-79-310. Moscow. NIC «Kurchatovskij institut» Publ., 2010, pp. 324-378 (in Russian).
8. Aver’yanova S.P., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Filimonov P.E., Hajtao Lyu, Jou Li. Testing of Advanced Algorithms for Controlling the Energy Release of VVER-1000 in conditions of maneuvering regimes at Tianwan NPP (China). Atomnaya Energiya. 2007, v. 103, no. 5, pp. 277- 282 (in Russian).
9. Aver’yanova S.P., Semchenkov Yu. M., Filimonov P.E., Gorohov A.K., Molchanov V.L., Korennoj A.A., Makeev V.P. The Adoption of Improved Algorithms for Controlling the Power Release in the VVER-1000 Core at Khmelnitskaya NPP. Atomnaya Energiya. 2005, v. 98, no. 6, pp. 414-421 (in Russian).
10. Aver’yanova S.P., Dubov A.A., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu.M., Filimonov P.E. VVER-1200/1300 Operation in a Daily Load Schedule. Atomnaya Energiya. 2012, v. 113, no. 5, pp. 247-252 (in Russian).
11. Povarov V.P., Lebedev O.V., Makeev V.V. Prevention and Suppression of Axial Xenon Oscillations in the VVER-1000 Core. Teploenergetika. 2003, v. 5, pp. 11-15 (in Russian).
12. Filimonov P.E., Krajnov Yu.A. Suppressing Axial Oscillations of the Energy Distribution in a VVЙR-1000 Reactor Without Half-Length Control Rods. Atomnaya Energiya. 1995, v. 78, no. 5, pp. 388-589 (in Russian).
13. Filimonov P.E., Aver’yanova S.P. Maintaining an Equilibrium Offset as an Effective Method for Suppressing Xenon Oscillations in VVER-1000. Atomnaya Energiya. 2001, v. 90, no. 3, pp. 231-233 (in Russian).
14. Filimonov P.E., Aver’yanova S.P., Olejnik S.G. Tests of VVER-1000 Maneuverability on the Fifth Unit of the Zaporozh’e Nuclear Power Plant. Atomnaya Energiya. 1998, v. 85, no. 5, pp. 364-367 (in Russian).
15. Maksimov M.V., Beglov K.V., Kanazirskij N.F. Control of the Axial Offset in a Nuclear Reactor in the Condition of Maneuvering Regimes. Avtomatizaciya tekhnologicheskih i biznes-processov. 2015, v. 7, no. 1, pp. 54-61 (in Russian).
16. Nikol’skij M.V. Axial Offset as Measure of Stability of Light Water Nuclear Reactor in the Condition of Maneuvering Regimes. Avtomatizaciya tekhnologicheskih i biznes-processov. 2014, v. 6, no. 4, pp. 65-72 (in Russian).
17. Semenov A.A., Vygovskij S.B., Chernakov V.A. Experience in Using the Software Complex PROSTOR and the Prospects of its Further Application. Sbornik trudov nauchnoj sessii MIFI. 2004, pp. 82-83 (in Russian).
18. Vygovskij S.B., Zimin V.G. Chernov E.V. Application to the Attestation Manual of the Program Complex PROSTOR (ver. 1). No 182 from Oct 28, 2004. Moscow. NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2004. 8p. (in Russian).