+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/08.pdf"
first_page="91"
last_page="104"
udc="621.039"
title="Some aspects of the re-extension of the reactor plant life with VVER-440 on the example of Novovoronezh NPP UNIT 4"
original_title="Некоторые аспекты повторного продления срока эксплуатации реакторной установки с ВВЭР-440 на примере энергоблока № 4 Нововоронежской АЭС"
authors=["PovarovVP", "FedorovAI", "VitkovskySL"]
tags=["re-extension of service life", "VVER-440", "V-179", "fluence", "radiation embrittlement", "safety systems", "annealing of the reactor vessel"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.08"

+++

The re-modernization of power Unit No. 4 of Novovoronezh NPP with the purpose of its further safe operation proved the possibility of a new approach to the extension of the resource characteristics and significantly increases the possibility of operation of reactor plants VVER-440. In the present article, the authors analyze the existing problems of the power unit with VVER-440 (B-179), show possible ways to solve the identified shortcomings, as well as the final state of the updated power unit, in particular, a significant expansion of the range of design accidents to the maximum possible associated with the rupture of the main circulation pipelines (GTP) (DN = 500 mm). In addition, a unique experience in the use of safety systems of Unit No. 3, decommissioned, to improve the reliability and additional redundancy of security systems of Unit No. 4. In particular, the activities within the modernization framework had allowed to expand significantly the spectrum of the design basis accidents with the primary coolant leak with a nominal diameter of 100 mm to the maximum possible, associated with the break of the Main Circulation Pipeline (MCP) (DN 500 mm). In addition, a unique experience was gained in applying the safety systems of power Unit No. 3, which was finally shutdown to be prepared for decommissioning, to increase reliability and to provide additional redundancy for safety systems of the Unit No. 4.

The results of the activities performed have demonstrated the correctness of the adopted concept of re-extending the service life of Unit No.4 and ensured the Unit compliance with up-to-date safety requirements in nuclear power engineering including, from the point of view of safety impact by the first-level probabilistic safety analysis model (PSA-1) for internal initiating events.

### References

1. Half a century of ensuring the safety of nuclear power plants with VVER in Russia and abroad. Collection of reports. Novovoronezh NPP Publ., 2014, 521 p. (in Russian).
2. Ovchinnikov F.Ya., Semenov V.V. Operational regimes of water5water energy reactors. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1988, 359 p. (in Russian).
3. NP-096-15. Requirements for managing the life of equipment and pipelines of nuclear power plants. The main provisions. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ., 2015, 19 p. (in Russian).
4. Gurovich B.A., Kuleshov E.A., Nikolaev Yu.A., Shtrombakh Ya.I. An assessment of the relative contribution of various mechanisms to the radiation embrittlement of reactor vessel materials. Preprint IAE-6025/11. Moscow. RNTs KI Publ., 1997, 107 p. (in Russian).
5. Alekseenko N.N., Amaev A.D., Gorynin I.V., Nikolaev V.A. Radiation embrittlement of steel bodies of water5water reactors. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981, 191 p. (in Russian).
6. Amaev A.D., Kryukov A.M., Neklyudov I.M., Parshin A.M., Platonov P.A., Tikhonov A.N., Khlopkin N.S., Shtrombakh Ya.I. . Radiation damageability and performance of structural materials. St. Petersburg. Politekhnika Publ., 1997, 312 p. (in Russian).
7. Shtrombakh Ya.I., Platonov P.A., Brak D.Yu., Nikolaev Yu.A. Justification of the strength and service life of reactor vessels. Rosenergoatom (the monthly magazine for atomic energy of Russia). 2006, no. 7, pp. 58-59 (in Russian).
8. Erak D.Yu. Material substantiation of the operation of VVER reactors outside the design service life. Diss. Dr. techn. Sci. Moscow 2013, 229 p. (in Russian).
9. Asmolov V.G., Povarov V.P., Vitkovsky S.L., Berkovich V.Ya., Chetverikov A.E., Mozul I.A., Semchenkov Yu.M., Suslov A.I. The concept of extending the life of power units with a VVER-440 Novovoronezh NPP. Teploenergetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 16-25 (in Russian).
10. NP-017-18. Basic requirements for extending the life of a nuclear power unit. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ., 2018, 21 p. (in Russian).
11. PNAE G-7-002-86. Standards for calculating the strength of equipment and pipelines of nuclear power plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 525 p. (in Russian).
12. RD EO 0421-02. Methods for predicting the strength characteristics of the material of the reactor vessel during irradiation. Moscow. Rosenergoatom Publ., 2012, 7 p. (in Russian).
13. MT 1.1.4.02.1204-2017. Calculation of the resistance to brittle fracture of the WWER5 440 (V5179, B5230) reactor shells, taking into account their annealing when extending the service life to 60 years. The technique. Moscow. AO «Kontsern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2017, 38 p. (in Russian).
14. Margulova T.Kh., Martynova O.N. Water regimes of thermal and nuclear power plants. Moscow. Vysshaya Shkola Publ., 1987, 318 p. (in Russian).
15. Karzov G.P., Margolin B.Z., Shvetsova V.A. Physical and mechanical modeling of destruction processes. St. Petersburg. Politekhnika Publ., 1993, 391 p. (in Russian).
16. Kutepov A.M. Hydrodynamics and heat transfer during vaporization. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1986, 448 p. (in Russian).
17. MT 1.1.4.02.1205-2017. Calculation of buildings of steam generators of VVER5440 reactor installations (B5179, B5230, B5213) for resistance to brittle fracture when extending the service life to 60 years. The technique. Moscow. AO «Kontsern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2017, 41 p. (in Russian).
18. NP-001-15. General provisions for the safety of nuclear power plants. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ.,2016, 57 p. (in Russian).
19. NP-026-16. Requirements for control systems important for the safety of nuclear power plants. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ., 2016, 30 p. (in Russian).