+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/11.pdf"
first_page="128"
last_page="139"
udc="621.039.548"
title="Outcomes of the «steady-state crisis» experiment in the MIR reactor channel"
original_title="Результаты эксперимента «кризис стационарный» в канале реактора МИР"
authors=["AlekseevAV", "DreganovOI", "IzhutovAL", "KiselevaIV", "ShulimovVN"]
tags=["MIR reactor", "fuel rod", "experimental fuel assembly (EFA)", "departure from nucleate boiling (DNB)", "RIA (reactivity-initiated accident)", "thermoelectric converter (TEC)", "temperature", "coolant flow rate", "power", "critical heat flux"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.11"

+++

To license nuclear fuel for nuclear power plants, data on the behavior of fuel elements under design-basis accidents are required. These data are obtained during tests of FAs and single fuel rods in research reactor channels, followed by post-test studies in protective chambers.

An accident with an unauthorized release of control rods from the reactor core leads to a pulsed channel power increase. It can proceed according to two scenarios: without a departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) on the fuel rod cladding at the final stage and with a DNB of the first type. To date, a series of experiments have been carried out according to the first scenario in the MIR reactor channel and the corresponding data on the behavior of fuel elements have been obtained. Preparation for conducting reactor experiments according to the second scenario is currently an urgent task.

The main experimental parameter that determines the behavior and the final state of fuel rods is their temperature. No experimental data were found on the critical heat flux for the rod bundles in the low coolant mass flow rate region (experiments in the MIR reactor channel can be conducted in the range of 200–250 kg/(m2s)). The available data are in the extrapolation range.

The «Steady-state crisis» experiment was conducted to obtain data on the critical heat flux value within the specified coolant mass rate range in the MIR reactor channel. The test object was a fragment fuel assembly composed of three shortened VVER-1000 fuel rods with a length of 1230 mm (the fuel part length is 1000 mm) installed in a triangular lattice at a pitch of 12.75 mm, which is a cell of the VVER-1000 core. This assembly configuration is used for in-pile tests to study the behavior of fuel rods under emergency conditions.

The results of the in-pile testing are presented. The paper shows the possibility of detecting the start and development of a type I cladding DNB based on the records of thermoelectric converters located inside inside the fuel rod kernel. As a result, the directly measured test parameters were used to determine the critical heat flux value.

### References

1. Izhutov A.L., Burukin A.V., Zhemkov I.Yu., Kalygin V.V., Ovchinnikov V.A. Capabilities of unique experimental reactor basis of JSC «SSC RIAR» for feasibility of new nuclear fuel. Conference Proceedings Poster «Reactor Fuel Performance Meeting / Top Fuel 2015», 13; 17 September 2015, Zurich, Switzerland, ISBN 978-92-95064-23-2, paper № TopFuel2015-A0063, pp. 448-457.
2. Alekseev A.V., Burukin A.V., Izhutov A.L., Kalygin V.V., Kiseleva I.V., Ovchinnikov V.A., Shulimov V.N. Test methods in the MIR reactor of VVER fuel during transient and emergency conditions. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2007, no. 3, iss. 1, pp. 83-91 (in Russian).
3. Alekseev A.V., Burukin A.V., Izhutov A.L., Kalygin V.V., Kiseleva I.V., Ovchinnikov V.A., Shulimov V.N. Programs and methods to test water-cooled reactor fuel rods in the MIR research reactor under simulated transient and accidental conditions. Atomnaya Energiya. 2012, v. 113, iss. 3, pp.146-150 (in Russian).
4. Goryachev A.V., Makhin V.M., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N. Integral reactor experiments to test multi-component fragments of VVER-440 and VVER-1000 FAs under LOCA conditions. Summary of experimental results. VANT. Ser.: Fizika Atomnykh Reactorov. 2004, iss. 2, pp. 29-38 (in Russian).
5. Burukin A.V., Ilyenko S.A., Izhutov A.L. Methodical fundamentals and results of investigating fission product release from 60 MWd/kgU VVER fuel rods with simulated defects in the MIR reactor loop facility. Proc. of the VIIIth International Conference on VVER Fuel Performance, Modeling and Experimental Support, 26 Sep – 04 Oct 2009, Burgas, Bulgaria. Sofia. Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy Bulgarian Academy of Sciences Publ., pp. 250-256.
6. Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Malkov A.P., Shulimov V.N. Examination of VVER fuel rod behavior under RIA. In-reactor experiment method and process. Sbornik trudov NIIAR. 2006, iss. 1, pp. 23-32 (in Russian).
7. Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Ovchinnikov V.A., Shulimov V.N. Method to test VVER-1000 fuel in the MIR reactor under RIA. Atomnaya Energiya. 2006, v. 101, iss. 6, pp.427-431 (in Russian).
8. Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V., Shulimov V.N. Post-test processing method and results for the data generated when testing VVER-1000 fuel in the MIR reactor under RIA. Sbornik trudov GNTs RF NIIAR. 2008, iss. 4, pp. 66-70 (in Russian).
9. Nechaeva O., Medvedev A., Novikov V. Researches оf WWER fuel rods behaviour under RIA accident conditions. Proc. of the Vth Intern. Conf. on VVER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support. 29 Sep – 3 Oct 2003. Albena, Bulgaria, 2004, pp. 309-318.
10. Bobkov V.P., Efanov A.D., Pometko R.S., Smogalev I.P. A modified table for calculating the critical heat fluxes in fuel rod assemblies in a triangular package. Teploenergetika. 2011, no. 4, pp. 43-51 (in Russian).
11. Logvinov S.A., Bezrukov Yu.A., Dragunov Yu.G. Experimental Substantiation of the Thermohydraulic Reliability of VVER Reactors. Moscow. IKTs Akademkniga Publ., 2004, 137 p. (in Russian).
12. Krylov D.A., Lozhkin V.V., Smirnov A.M. Experimental study of the heat transfer crisis on rod models of VVER fuel assemblies at low pressures and flow rates characteristic of emergency conditions. Proc. of the Conf. «Teplofizika;95». 1995, v. 1, pp. 174 -180 (in Russian).
13. Shchekoldin V.I., Bykov M.A., Zaitsev S.I., Bezrukov Yu.A. Analysis of the experimental data on the crisis and the post-crisis heat transfer with the help of the calculation codes of the TRAP and RELAP5 / mod 3.2. Proc. of the Conf. « Teplofizika;98». 1998, v. 1, pp. 295-303 (in Russian).
14. Sergeev V.V. Generalization of data on the heat exchange crisis during boiling water in pipes and core assemblies. Proc. of the Conf. « Teplofizika;98». 1998, v. 1, pp. 330-337 (in Russian).
15. Lozhkin V.V., Kolmakov A.P., Smirnov A.M. Computational and experimental study of the crisis of heat transfer and local heating of the coolant on a 19-rod model of VVER fuel assemblies with a central non-heated rod. Proc. of the Conf. « Teplofizika;98». 1998, v. 1, pp. 320-329 (in Russian).
16. Bobkov V. P., Smogalev I. P. On the Accuracy of Describing Different Codes of Critical Heat Flows in Rods Bundles. Teploenergetika. 2001, no. 3, pp. 21-28 (in Russian).
17. V.V. Bolshakov, L.L. Kobzar, K. B. Kosourov, D.A. Oleksyuk, Yu.M. Semchenkov. An experimental study of the effect of axial non-uniformity of heat generation on critical heat fluxes in bundles of rods. Proc. of the VIth International Conference «Safety Assurance of NPPs with VVER», May 26;29, 2009. Podolsk. OAO «OKB Gidropress» Publ., 2009 (CD, track 209) (in Russian).
18. V.V. Bolshakov, V.K. Ivanov, L.L. Kobzar, K. B. Kosourov, D.A. Oleksyuk, Yu.M. Semchenkov. Experimental study of the spacing effect of the spacer grids arrangement on the critical heat fluxes in bundles of rods. Proc. of the VIth International Conference «Safety Assurance of NPPs with VVER», May 26;29, 2009. Podolsk. OAO «OKB Gidropress» Publ., 2009 (CD, track 108) (in Russian).
19. Groeneveld D.C., Shan J.Q., Vasic A.Z., Leung L.K.H., Durmayazd A., Yanga J., Cheng S.C., Tanase A. The 2006 CHF look-up table. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2007, v. 237, pp. 1909-1922. Available at: http://www.mie.uth.gr/ekp_yliko/CHF_Groeneveld_2006_table.pdf/ (accessed Aug 08, 2018).
20. Dreganov O.I., Shulimov V.N., Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V. Results of the «Steady-State Crisis» Experiment. Sbornik trudov OAO «GNTs RF NIIAR». 2014, iss. 2, pp. 3-9 (in Russian).
21. Dreganov O.I., Shulimov V.N., Alekseev A.V., Kiseleva I.V. «Steady-state crisis» experiment and its results. Proc. of the IXth Intern. Sci. Conf. on Safety Assurance of NPPs with VVER. Podolsk. OAO «OKB «Gidropress» Publ., 2015, p.75. ISBN 978-5-94883-136-7 (in Russian).
22. Alekseev N.I., Gomin E.A., Marin S.V., Nasonov V.A., Shkarovsky D.A., Yudkevich M.S. MCU-PTR software for precision computations of pool-type research reactors. Atomnaya Energiya. 2010, v. 10, iss. 3, p. 123 (in Russian).
23. Alekseev A.V. Use of the MUZA program for computational support of experiments in research reactors. VANT. Ser.: Fizika Atomnykh Reactorov. 2013, iss. 3, pp. 135-140 (in Russian).
24. Bobkob V.P. Table method to calculate critical heat flux in water-cooled triangular assemblies. Atomnaya Energiya. 1999, v. 87, iss. 1, pp. 37-43 (in Russian).