+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/12.pdf"
first_page="140"
last_page="152"
udc="621.039, 553.495 (063, 470)"
title="The value of spent nuclear fuel as a raw material for fueling reactors on thermal neutrons"
original_title="О ценности ОЯТ как сырья для топлива реакторов на тепловых нейтронах"
authors=["SolovevaAP", "UliyaninYA", "KharitonovVV", "YurshinaDYu"]
tags=["spent nuclear fuel (SNF)", "SNF reprocessing", "REMIX-fuel", "SNF reprocessing value", "thermal reactors", "fast reactors", "nuclear energy development scenarios", "natural uranium resources"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.12"

+++

An analytical model is presented to determine the energy and economic value of SNF as a raw material for thermal reactors’ fuel and to identify the period of time when the energy demand for mass production of fuel from SNF appears. Possible scenarios for using of fuel resources from SNF for compensation of the predicted shortage of natural uranium which occurs from the exhaustion of deposits with the lowest cost of production and limited resources with a cost price of up to $ 260/kgU (with available forecasts of recoverable resources) are given. From the energy (resource) point of view, there is no need in large-scale SNF reprocessing for thermal reactors fuel production almost until 2040. The need to reprocess SNF in the coming decades is determined not by resource considerations, but by the necessity to reduce the amount of highly radioactive waste, develop industrial technologies of SNF treatment for the future safe and economically acceptable closed nuclear fuel cycle (NFC), increase the competitiveness of fuel companies on a global market due to the integrated offer of NFC services, etc.

Calculations of the fuel component in the cost of electricity produced by nuclear power plants with REMIX-fuel are made. REMIX-fuel is obtained by adding a certain amount of highly enriched uranium (up to 20%) to an unseparated mixture of uranium and plutonium in the reprocessed SNF which is purified from fission products and has a fissionable nuclide concentration of 1 – 2%. The enrichment of this additive has little effect on the REMIX-fuel price, since its price increases with an increase in the additive enrichment, but the mass fraction necessary for obtaining a given enrichment of fuel from thermal reactors decreases.

A concept of SNF reprocessing value for the production of REMIXfuel is presented with the method of its calculation. The higher the value of SNF reprocessing, the more profitable the production of REMIX-fuel for thermal reactors.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.Kh. Ecologically Impeccable Nuclear Power. Moscow. NIIKIET n.a. N.A. Dollezhal Publ., 2007, 145 p. (in Russian).
2. Devos L. AREVA sustainable back0end solutions for smooth and optimized nuclear development. June 3, 2015. Atomexpo 2015, 14 p. Available at: http://2019.atomexpo.ru/2015/mediafiles/u/files/materials/6/Devos.pdf (accessed Oct 10, 2019) (in Russian).
3. Bobrov E.A. Research of fuel cycle closure characteristics for VVER reactors based on REMIX-technology. Dr. techn. sci. diss. Moscow, 2016. 129 p. (in Russian).
4. Fedorov Yu.S., Bibichev B.A., Zilberman B.Ya., Kudryavsev E.G. Use of regenerated uranium and plutonium in thermal reactors. Atomic Energy. 2005, v. 99, no. 2, pp. 136-141 (in Russian).
5. Dekusar V.M., Kagramanyan V.S., Kalashnikov A.G., Kapranova E.N., Korobitsyn V.E., Puzakov A.Yu. The comparison analyses of VVER REMIX fuel characteristics when multiple recycling were made. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 4, pp. 109-117 (in Russian).
6. Enhancing Benefits of Nuclear Energy Technology Innovation through Cooperation among Countries: Final Report of the INPRO Collaborative Project SYNERGIES. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series, No. NF-T-4.9. IAEA, Vienna, 2018, 360 p.
7. Kharitonov V.V. Dynamics of nuclear power development. Economic and analytical models. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2014, 328 p. (in Russian).
8. Zhivov V.L., Boytsov A.V., Shumilin M.V. Uranium: Geology, Extraction, Economics. Moscow. RIS «VIMS» Publ., 2012, 304 p. (in Russian).
9. Uranium 2018: Resources, Production and Demand. OECD 2018, NEA No. 7413. Nuclear energy agency, Organisation for economic co-operation and development, 2018, 462 p.
10. World Distribution of Uranium Deposits (UDEPO) 2016 Edition. IAEA-TECDOC-1843. IAEA. Vienna, 2018, 262 р.
11. Uliyanin Yu.A., Kharitonov V.V., Yurshina D.Yu. Prospects for nuclear power in the context of the exhaustion of traditional energy resources. Izvestia vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no.4, pp. 5-16 (in Russian).
12. World Nuclear Association. Information Library. Available at: http://www.world-nuclear.org/information-library.aspx (accessed Oct 10, 2019).
13. The Nuclear Fuel Report. Global Scenarios for Demand and Supply Availability 2017-2035. World Nuclear Association, 2017, 185 р.
14. Energy, Electricity and Nuclear Power Estimates for the Period up to 2050. Reference Data Series No. 1, 2017 Edition. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2017, 156 p.
15. Gorokhov A.K., Dragunov Yu.G., Lunin G.L., Novikov A.N., Tsofin V.I., Anan’ev Yu.A. Justification of the Neutron0Physical and Radiation Parts of vver projects. Moscow. Akademkniga Publ., 2004, 496 p. (in Russian).
16. Janberg Klaus, Hippel Frank von. «Dry» Intermediate Container Storage of SNF as an Alternative to its Processing. Available at: http://www.proatom.ru/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=7476 (accessed Oct 10, 2019).
17. Use of Reprocessed Uranium: Challenges and Options. IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No. NF-T-4.4. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2009, 79 р.
18. Klinov D.A., Gulevich A.V., Bakanov M.V., Troyanov V.M. Two-Component Nuclear Power with Closed Fuel Cycle and the Role of Thermal and Fast Neutron Reactors. Proc. of the VIth Int. Symp. MNTK02018. Moscow. VNIIAES Publ., 2018, 21 p. (in Russian).
19. The Economy of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Translation from English. Moscow. Inform-Atom Publ., 1999, 164 p. (in Russian).
20. Vasilchenko I.N., Kurakin K.Yu., Kushmanov S.A., Dzhalandinov A.D., Chernyshev V.N., Kalinichenko P.F. Analysis of the Possibility of Handling Fresh REMIX-Fuel at Operating NPPs with VVER-1000. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/publication/go-2013/documents/55.pdf (accessed Oct 10, 2019) (in Russian).
21. Maslennikov I.A., Fedorov Yu.S., Shadrin A.Yu., Zilberman B.Ya., Babain V.A., Bibichev B.A. Recycling of Irradiated Fuel: New Requirements and Innovative Approaches. V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute, April 26, 2012. Available at: http://www.atomic-energy.ru/articles/2012/04/26/33029 (accessed Oct 10, 2019) (in Russian).