+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/13.pdf"
first_page="153"
last_page="163"
udc="621.039.54(04)"
title="Investigation of the possibility of Am-241 incineration and transmutation in ameritium-fueled reactor"
original_title="Исследования возможности выжигания и трансмутации америция в реакторе с Am-топливом"
authors=["KorobeynikovVV", "KarazhelevskayaYuE", "KolesovVV", "TerehovaAM"]
tags=["transmutation", "minor actinides", "spent fuel", "radioactivity", "biological hazard"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.13"

+++

Studies were carried out on the transmutation of americium in nuclear reactor loaded with americium fuel instead of conventional types of nuclear fuel – uranium and/or MOX-fuel. The advantages of implementation of this approach to transmutation as compared with traditional ones are fairly obvious. Thus, if, for instance, a reactor loaded with uranium or MOX-fuel is used for transmutation, then, in addition to burning «foreign» minor actinides, it will simultaneously be breeding «its own» long-lived nuclides. In the case of fuel composed of some minor actinides, it will be only incinerating «its own» inventory. Analysis demonstrated that only a fast reactor must be used for the purpose, which is associated with special properties of neutron capture and fission cross-sections for minor actinides compared to nuclides in the composition of conventional fuel. The results of calculations demonstrated fairly high rate of americium transmutation in reactor loaded with americium fuel.

Implemented studies of americium transmutation revealed an interesting effect. After initiation of irradiation the value of keff first increases and then begins to decrease. The explanation is associated with accumulation of nuclides additionally contributing in the multiplication factor as compared with fresh americium. An important argument in favor of reactor load with americium fuel is that by burning long-lived waste we produce electrical energy. The problem for nuclear reactor loaded with uranium or with MOX-fuel is, as well, that transmutation impairs reactor economy and its performance parameters. Designing reactor core with americium fuel remains to be problematic. The problem of high heat dissipation of such fuel must be addressed in the first place.

### References

1. Use of Fast Reactors for Actinide Transmutation. Proc. of the Specialists Meeting held in Obninsk. Russian Federation. September 22124, 1992. IAEA1TECDOC1693. IAEA, 1993, p. 125.
2. Matveev V.I.. Ivanov A.P.. Efimenko E.M. Concept of Specialized Fast Reactor for Minor Actinide Burning. Proc. of the Specialists Meeting held in Obninsk. Russian Federation. September 22124, 1992. IAEA1TECDOC1693. IAEA, 1993, p.114.
3. Guy E.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Rabotnov N.S., Shubin Yu.N. The concept of handling long-lived nuclear waste. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1994, no. 1, pp. 17-21 (in Russian).
4. Ganev I.Kh., Lopatkin A.V., Orlov V.V. Heterogeneous transmutation Am, Cm, Np in the core of the BREST reactor. Atomnaya Energiya, 2000, v. 89, no. 5, pp. 362-365 (in Russian).
5. Gerasimov A.S., Kiselev G.V. Scientific and technical problems of creating electronuclear installations for the transmutation of long-lived radioactive waste and simultaneous energy production (Russian experience). Fizika Elementarnykh Chastits i Atomnogo Yadra, 2001, v. 32, no. 1, p. 188.
6. Popov V.E., Strebkov Yu.S., Sysoev A.G., Kuteev B.V., Shpansky Yu.S. Hybrid blanket of a thermonuclear neutron source and its non-physical characteristics. Proc. of the V1th International Scientific and Technical Conference « Innovative projects and technologies of nuclear energy» October 215, 2018. Moscow. JSC «NIKIET» Publ., 2018, pp. 215-217 (in Russian).
7. Adamov E.O., Ganev I.Kh., Lopatkin AV, Muratov V.G., Orlov V.V. Transmutation fuel cycle in large1scale nuclear power engineering of Russia. Moscow. GUP NIKIET Publ., 1999, 300 p. (in Russian).
8. Salvatores M., Slessarev I., Uematsu M. A Global Physics Approach to Transmutation of Radioactive Nuclei. Nucl. Sci. Eng., 1994, v. 116, pp. 1-18.
9. Eliseev V.A., Poplavskaya E.V. Possibilities of deep burning of americium and neptunium in the active zone of a fast sodium reactor. Atomnaya Energiya, 2004, v. 96, no. 3, pp. 193-199 (in Russian).
10. Poplavsky V.M., Chebeskov A.N., Matveev V.I. BN-800 Reactor as a New Stage in the Development of Fast Sodium Reactor Technology. Atomnaya Energiya, 2004, v. 96, no. 6, pp. 426-432 (in Russian).
11. Dekusar V.M., Ivanov R.E., Demeneva I.V., Korobeinikov V.V. Selection of effective scenarios for transmutation of MA taking into account economic costs. Abstracts of the XIV International Conference «NPP Safety and Training». Obninsk. IATE Publ., 2015, pp. 228-229 (in Russian).
12. Kazansky Yu.A., Romanov M.I. Transmutation of small actinides in the neutron spectrum of a thermal neutron reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 140-146 (in Russian).
13. McLane V., Editor. ENDF-102, Data Formats and Procedures for the Evaluated Nuclear Data File ENDF-6. BNL-NCS-44945–1/04-Rev. Brookhaven National Laboratory, 2001. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/26/044/26044961.pdf?r=1&r=1 (accessed Nov 10, 2018).
14. McFarlane R.E. and Muir D.W. The NJOY Nuclear Data Processing System. LA-12740-M. Los Alamos National Laboratory, 1994. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/ NCLCollectionStore/_Public/26/044/26044961.pdf?r=1&r=1 (accessed Nov 10, 2018).
15. Technical features to enhance proliferation resistance of nuclear energy systems. IAEA, Vienna, 2010. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1464_web.pdf (accessed Nov 10, 2018).
16. IAEA Advisory material for the IAEA regulations for the safe transport of radioactive material, safety Guide № TS-G-1.1, IAEA, Vienna, 2008. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/mtcd/publications/pdf/pub1325_web.pdf (accessed Nov 10, 2018).
17. Ivanov V.K., Chekin S.Yu., Menyaylo A.N., Maksyutov M.A., Tumanov K.A., Kashcheeva P.V., Lovachev S.S., Adamov E.O., Lopatkin A.V. Comparative analysis of the levels of «radiotoxicity» of individual radionuclides SNF from BREST and VVER reactors at different exposure times based on modern ICRP «dose-effect» models. Radiatsiya i Risk. 2018, v. 27, no. 4, pp. 8-27 (in Russian).
18. Alekseev P., Vasiliev А., Mikityuk K., Subbotin S., Fomichenko P., Schepetina Т. Lead1 bismuth reactor RBEC: optimization of conceptual decisions. Preprint IAE-6229/4, 2001. Moscow. NRC «Kurchatov Institute» Publ., 2001.
19. Leppaanen Jaakko. PSG2/SERPENT – A Continuous Energy Monte-Carlo Reactor Physics Burnup Calculation Code. Helsinki. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
2015. Available at: http://montecarlo.vtt.fi/download/Serpent_manual.pdf (accessed Nov 10, 2018).
20. X-5 Monte Carlo Team. MCNP – A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code. Version 5, volume II: User’s Guide. Appendix B, April 2003, – B-2. Available at: https://mcnp.lanl.gov/pdf_files/la-ur-03-1987.pdf (accessed Nov 10, 2018).