+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/14.pdf"
first_page="164"
last_page="173"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental studies into the dependences of the axial lead coolant circulation pump performance on the pump straightening device parameters"
original_title="Экспериментальные исследования зависимостей характеристик осевых насосов, перекачивающих свинцовый теплоноситель, от параметров выправляющего аппарата"
authors=["BeznosovAV", "LvovAV", "BokovaTA", "BokovPA", "LukichevNS"]
tags=["heavy liquid metal coolant", "fast neutron reactor", "lead coolant", "axial pump", "pump head", "pump delivery rate", "pump impeller"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.14"

+++

The paper presents the results of experimental studies into the dependences of the axial pump performance (delivery rate, head, efficiency) in lead coolant on the parameters of the straightening device (SD) installed downstream of the impeller (the SD inlet flow angle and the number of the SD blades with a variable impeller speed change).

The studies were performed as applied to the operating conditions of small and medium plants with lead cooled fast neutron reactors with horizontal steam generators (BRS GPG). The designs of such plants are being matured at Nizhny Novgorod State Technical University (NNSTU).

The experiments were conducted on the NNSTU FT-4 test bench at the lead coolant temperatures in a range of 440 to 500 °C. The number of the test blades was five and eight, and the SD inlet flow angle was 22, 24, 28, and 32°. The tests were also performed with no SD (with the dismantled SD). The shaft speed of the NNSTU NSO-01 pump, with changeable SDs installed into its rotating assembly, was varied in a range of 600 to 1100 rev/min with a step of 100 rev/min. The SD sleeve diameter was 82 mm, the SD blade diameter and height were 213 mm and 80 mm respectively, and the maximum lead coolant flow rate during the studies was up to ~ 1650 t/h. The NNSTU NSO-01 pump performance was determined with four changeable straightening devices and with no SD, the pump shaft speed being 600 to 1100 rev/min, as the circulation circuit hydraulic resistance changed owing to the movement of the wedge in the valve installed in it. The tests were performed with the impeller designed and supplied by NNSTU (D = 213 mm, dsl = 82 mm, the blade number is four, and the blade angle is 28°).

The obtained results are recommended to be used to design axial heavy liquid metal coolant pumps.

### References

1. Beznosov A.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Rachkov V.I. Heavy Liquid1Metal Coolants in Nuclear Power Engineering. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2006, 435 p. (in Russian).
2. Pflejderer K. Paddle Machines for Liquid and Gas. Moscow. Gosudarstvennoe Nauchno-tekhnicheskoe Izdatel’stvo Mashinostroitel’noy Literatury Publ., 1960, 685 p. (in Russian).
3. Karelin V.Ya. Cavitation Phenomena in Centrifugal and Axial Pumps. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1975, 336 p. (in Russian).
4. Lomakin A.A. Centrifugal and Axial Pumps. Moscow-Leningrad. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1966, 364 p. (in Russian).
5. Budov V.M. Pumps of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow: Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 408 p. (in Russian).
6. Mihajlov A.K., Maljushenko V.V. Paddle Pumps. Theory, Calculation and Design. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1977, 288 p. (in Russian).
7. Rozhdestvenskij V.V. Cavitation. Leningrad. Sudostroenie Publ., 1977, 247 p. (in Russian).
8. Beznosov A.V., Lvov A.V., Bokov P.A., Bokova P.A., Shihov D.V. Experimental research and development of the characteristics of pumps on a lead coolant. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika, 2015, no. 4, pp. 123-132 (in Russian).
9. Beznosov A.V., Lvov A.V., Bokov P.A., Bokova P.A., Razin V.A. Experimental studies of the dependencies of the characteristics of axial pumps, pumped lead coolant, on the parameters of grids of profiles of impellers. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2017, no. 1, pp. 138-144 (in Russian).
10. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Zudin A.D., Lvov A.V., Bokova T.A., Trushkov N.V. Hydrodynamics and efficiency of models of MCP BREST-OD-300 in a lead coolant at the FT-4 stand of the NSTU. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva, 2015, no. 1, pp. 125-133 (in Russian).
11. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A., Zudin A.D., Kozlov A.A., Meluzov A.G., Novozhilova O.O. Experimental research and development of pumps for pumping lead and lead-bismuth coolant for nuclear installations. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva, 2017, no. 1, pp. 117-128 (in Russian).
12. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Zudin A.D., Lvov A.V., Bokova T.A., Trushkov N.V. Hydrodynamics and efficiency of models of MCP BREST-OD-300 in a lead coolant at the FT-4 stand of the NSTU. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva, 2014, no. S5, p. 370 (in Russian).
13. Beznosov A.V., Drozdov YU.N., Antonenkov M.A., Bokova T.A., L’vov A.V., Lemekhov V.V. Experimental study of the flowing part of the model of the axial main circulation pump of a reactor installation with a heavy liquid-metal coolant. Vestnik mashinostroeniya, 2014, no. 2, pp. 38-45 (in Russian).
14. Beznosov A.V., Drozdov Yu.N., Antonenkov M.A., Bokova T.A., Lemekhov V.V., L’vov A.V. Investigation of the characteristics of the flowing part and the bearing assembly of a reactor installation with a lead coolant. Trenie i iznos, 2014, v. 35, no. 4, pp. 489-493 (in Russian).
15. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Bokova T.A. Technologies and the basic equipment of circuits of reactor installations, industrial and research stands with lead and lead1 bismuth coolants. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2016, 488 p. (in Russian).
16. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A. Equipment of Power Circuits with Heavy Liquid1Metal Coolants in Nuclear Power Engineering. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2012, 536 p. (in Russian).
17. Handbook of thermohydraulic calculations. Vol. 1. Ed. B.S. Petukhov. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 360 p. (in Russian).
18. Beznosov A.V., Dragunov Yu.G., Rachkov V.I. Features of the characteristics of the flow-through part of the axial pump model on a high-temperature lead coolant. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva, 2013, no. 4 (101), pp. 206-213 (in Russian).
19. Beznosov A.V., Lvov A.V., Bokov P.A., Lemekhov V.V., Larkina Yu.A. Nuclear Power Plant. Patent for Utility Model RUS 123183 Monday, June 25, 2012 (in Russian).
20. Drozdov Yu.N., Beznosov A.V., Makarov V.V., Puchkov V.N., Antonenkov M.A., Kuznetsov D.V. Investigation of the friction nodes of nuclear installations operating in the environment of heavy high-temperature liquid-metal coolants. Vestnik Samarskogo universiteta. Aehrokosmicheskaya tekhnika, tekhnologii i mashinostroenie, 2009, no. 3-1 (19), pp. 128-136 (in Russian).
21. Beznosov A.V., Antonenkov M.A., Bokov P.A., Baranova V.S., Kustov M.S. Specificity of circulating pumps of reactor circuits with lead and lead-bismuth coolants. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika, 2009, no. 4. pp. 155-160. (in Russian).
22. Dragunov Yu.G., Lemekhov V.V., Moiseev A.V., Smirnov V.S. Fast neutron reactor with lead coolant (BREST). Problemy mashinostroeniya i avtomatizacii, 2015, no. 3, pp. 97-103 (in Russian).
23. Chechyotkin A.V. High-Temperature Coolants. Moscow. Energia Publ., 1971, 496 p. (in Russian).