+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:07:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="18"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/18.pdf"
first_page="208"
last_page="218"
udc="378.4:621.039"
title="Training for the developing nuclear power"
original_title="Подготовка кадров для развивающейся атомной энергетики"
authors=["PutilovAV", "StrikhanovMN", "TikhomirovGV"]
tags=["nuclear power", "educational technologies", "digital economy in power engineering", "staff training", "education export"]
rubric = "training"
rubric_name = "Personnel training"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.18"

+++

The article briefly describes the history of training for the nuclear industry and sets tasks for its improvement and development to ensure the future growth of nuclear power. Within the emerging digital economy, a new phenomenon is digital platforms: they blur the boundaries between industries, form new unexpected industrial alliances, even new industries. Innovative activities in the energy sector, including nuclear power, should enable the formation of digital economic platforms in various energy segments, as well as training for the use of this new tool. Rosatom state Corporation is currently constructing more than thirty new NPP projects in Russia and 12 other countries. This requires educational support and for this purpose a Consortium of supporting universities of the state Corporation «Rosatom», which includes 18 specialized universities. More than half of them train personnel directly for the design, creation and operation of nuclear power plants. The scale of the necessary personnel training in the near future shows that we need a new «educational paradigm», which can be described as «front-line education» –training for the development of digital economy technologies at the same time throughout the «front». This front extends from students preparing for admission to universities, to personnel in the workplace, the training of which, as production personnel, should be carried out taking into account the peculiarities of the digital transformation of production. Partnership is one of the leading values of the modern young generation. To maintain a high level of competition for the best staff, organizations must not only be imbued with a culture of partnership from within, but also act as reliable partners for each other in training and attracting young employees.

### References

1. Kirillov P.L. Alexander Illich Leipunsky and his principles in the system of higher Education. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 1, pp. 165-168 (in Russian).
2. Ivanov V.V., Putilov A.V. Digital Future: The next step in the development of nuclear energy technologies. Energeticheskaya Politika, 2017, iss. 3, pp. 31-42 (in Russian).
3. Ilyina N.A., Putilov A.V. Analysis of formation, current state and prospects of development of the main participants of the world innovative Nuclear market. Innovatsii. 2012, no. 9, pp. 10-15 (in Russian).
4. Putilov A.V., Vorobyev A.G., Strikhanov M. N. Innovation activity in the nuclear industry. Book one. «Basic principles of innovation policy». Moscow. Publishing house «Ruda i metaliys», 2010, 184 p. (in Russian).
5. Strikhanov M. N., Sheregi F.E. Science in Russia. Sociological analysis. Moscow. Center for Social Forecasting Publ., 2006, 455 p. (in Russian).
6. Strikhanov M.N., Trubetzkov D. I. A. Sharaevsky Yu. P., Khramov A. E. Higher school ofRussia from the position of nonlinear dynamics (problems, estimations, models).Moscow. Fizmatlit Publ., 2007, 192  . (in Russian).