+++

categories="article"
date="2019-06-24T00:04:00+03:00"
issue="2019-02"
issue_name="2019 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="21"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/02/21.pdf"
first_page="236"
last_page=""
udc="539.1; 544.1; 14; 930.85"
title="From the planetary model of the atom to the first nuclear power plant"
original_title="От планетарной модели атома до первой АЭС"
authors=["KharitonovVV"]
rubric = "historyofscience"
rubric_name = "History of science"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.21"

+++

The planetary atom model was born at first in Russia in B.N. Chicherin (1828 – 1904) articles, published at 1888-1889 years in «Journal of Russian Physical-Chemical Society». Analysis of the Mendeleev table and changes of chemical elements density stimulates B.N. Chicherin to conclusions: «all atoms difference depends on the quantity and distribution of the substance into atoms…», in the atom «…a central substance is electropositive, and peripheral – electronegative…», i.e. «…the atom with central nucleus and revolving around him substance is the analogue of the solar system». Other Russian scientist N.A. Morozov (1854 – 1946) developed ideas of B.N. Chicherin in monograph «Periodical systems of matter structure» which were published in 1907.

### References

1. Kharitonov V.V. To the 100th anniversary of the Bohr atom. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2013, no. 3, pp. 4851 (in Russian).
2. Bohr N. On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules. Philosophical Magazine. 1913, v. 26, pp. 125.
3. Rutherford E. The Scattering of a and b Particles by Matter and the Structure of the Atom. Philosophical Magazine.1911, ser. 6, v. 21, pp. 669688.
4. Chicherin B.N. Chemical elements system. Zhurnal Russkogo FizikoKhimicheskogo Obschestva. 18881889, v. 12. St. Petersburg. (in Russian).
5. Chicherin B.N. I. Chemical elements system. II. The laws of the formation of chemical elements. Moscow. S.P. Yakovlev Publ. 1911. 498 p. (in Russian). Available at: https://garbuzenko.livejournal.com/1233.html?thread=6609#t28625 (https://yadi.sk/i/buDeWy4HI0Ry4Q) (accessed Apr 20, 2019) (in Russian).
6. Morozov N.A. Periodical Systems of Matter Structure: Theory of Formation of Chemical Elements. Moscow. I.D. Sytin Publ., 1907, 437 p. (in Russian).