+++

categories="article"
date="2021-12-08T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2021-04"
issue_name="2021 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/04/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="18"
udc="621.039.52.034.6."
title="Lead-Bismuth Cooled Reactors: History and the Potential of Development Part 1: History of Development"
original_title="Свинцово-висмутовые реакторы: история создания и перспективы развития. Часть 1. История создания"
authors=["TroyanovVM", "ToshinskyGI", "StepanovVS", "PetrochenkoVV"]
tags=["lead-bismuth coolant", "reactor", "steam generator", "polonium", "accident", "corrosion", "operating experience", "reactor core"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.01"

+++

The history of the development of reactor facilities (RF) with lead-bismuth coolant (LBC) for nuclear submarines (NPS) carried out in the absence of the necessary knowledge and experience in the conditions of imposed strict prescriptive deadlines for the completion of works, which practically excluded the possibility of implementation of comprehensive accompanying scientific research, is discussed. The above situation resulted during the stage of mastering this unique in the world technology in numerous failures the reasons for which were later identified and eliminated. Substantiations are given for the choice of the lead-bismuth eutectic alloy as the reactor coolant, the main scientific and technical problems solved in the course of mastering the RFs with LBC, including the problems of coolant technology and corrosion resistance of steels, issues of ensuring radiation safety during works accompanied with the release of polonium, ensuring the reliability of steam generators, incidents and accidents that took place during the operation and ways to eliminate their causes are described.

### References

1. Leipunsky A.I. Selected Works. Memories. Kiev. Naukova Dumka, 1990, 225 p. (in Russian).
2. Gromov B.F., Grigoriev O.G., Dedoul A.V, Toshinsky G.I., Stepanov V.S., Nikitin L.B. The Analysis of Operating Experience of Reactor Installations Using Lead-Bismuth Coolant and Accidents Happened. Proc. of the I-st Intern. Conf. on Heavy-Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (TZhMT-98), v. 1, pp. 63-69. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI, 1999 (inтRussian). See also in Toshinskii G. Lead-Bismuth Cooled Fast Reactors. Collection of Selected Articles and Papers. LAMBERT Academic Publishing, 2016, pp. 42-54.
3. Zrodnikov A.V., Yefanov A.D., Orlov Yu.I, Martynov P.N., Troyanov V.M., Rusanov A.E. Technology of Pb-Bi and Pb heavy liquid-metal coolants. Report No. 2108 at the Conf. «Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (TZhMT-2003)» held within the Russian Scientific and Technical Forum «Fast Nuclear Reactors» dedicated to the 100th anniversary of the birth of A.I. Leypunsky. December 8-12, 2003. CD-ROM. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI, 2003 (in Russian).
4. Rusanov A.E, Troyanov V.M, Belomytsev Yu.S., Smirnov A.A., Yachmenyev G.S., Gibadullin R.H., Sugonyaev V.N., Pyhtin V.M. Development and Research of Cladding Steels for Fuel Elements of Nuclear Power Facilities with Heavy Coolants. Proc. of the I-st Intern. Conf. on Heavy-Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (TZhMT098), v. 2, pp. 633-639. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI, 1999 (in Russian).
5. Handbook on Lead0Bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and Technologies. 2015 Edition, OECD-NEA, no. 7268, pp. 185-232.
6. Pankratov D.V., Yefimov E.I., Toshinsky G.I., Ryabaya L.D. Analysis of Polonium Danger in Nuclear Power Installations with Lead-Bismuth Coolant. Proc. of the ICAPP’05, Seoul, Korea, May 15-19, 2005, Paper No. 5497 (CD-ROM). See also in Toshinskii G. Lead-Bismuth Cooled Fast Reactors. Collection of Selected Articles and Papers. LAMBERT Academic Publishing, 2016, pp. 180-200.
7. Wiggs Laurie D., Cox-De Vore Carol A. and Voelz George L. Mortality among a Cohort of Workers Monitored for Po-210 Exposure: 1944-1972 y.y. Epidemiology Section Occupational Medicine Group, Los-Alamos National Laboratory, Health Physics. 1991, v. 61, no. 1, pp. 71-76; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/00004032-199107000-00007 .
8. Pylchenkov E.H. The Issue of Freezing-Defreezing Lead-Bismuth Liquid Metal Coolant in Reactor Installations’ Circuits. Proc. of the I-st Intern. Conf. on Heavy-Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (TZhMT098), v. 1, pp. 110-119. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI, 1999, (in Russian).
9. Sazonov V.K, Tihomirov V.I., Tihonenko V.B., Toshinsky G.I., Shestopalov A.I., Stepanov V.S., Vahrooshin M.P., Alekseev G.A. Technology and Experience of Repair Works and Refuelings for the Nuclear Power Installations with Lead-Bismuth Coolant. Proc. of the I- st Intern. Conf. on Heavy-Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Technologies (TZhMT098), v. 2, pp. 599-605. Obninsk. GNTs RF-FEI, 1999 (in Russian). See also in Toshinskii G. Lead-Bismuth Cooled Fast Reactors. Collection of Selected Articles and Papers. LAMBERT Academic Publishing, 2016, pp. 76-91.