+++

categories="article"
date="2021-12-08T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2021-04"
issue_name="2021 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/04/02.pdf"
first_page="19"
last_page="30"
udc="614.7:621.039.58"
title="Radioecological Monitoring and its Role in Ensuring Safety of Nuclear Power Plants"
original_title="Радиоэкологический мониторинг и его роль в обеспечении безопасности атомных электростанций"
authors=["FesenkoSV", "SanzharovaNI", "KarpenkoEI", "IsamovNN", "KuznetsovVK", "PanovAV", "TsygvintsevPN"]
tags=["nuclear power plant", "radiation safety", "radiological and environmental monitoring", "exposure doses", "man-made contamination"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.02"

+++

Methodological approaches are outlined for organizing radiological and environmental monitoring in the nuclear power plant location areas. An analysis of the monitoring results from the Beloyarsk, Kursk, Leningrad and Rostov NPPs has shown that the contribution of the natural radiation background to the public exposure dose varies within a narrow range of 3.13 to 4.16 mSv per year, and doses from the existing man-made contamination varies in a range of 0.47 (Rostov NPP) to 150 mSv per year (Beloyarsk NPP). The variability of exposure doses is explained both by the effects of the natural and climatic conditions and by the impact from other sources of contamination and by differences in electricity generation technologies. The man-made radiation background in the Beloyarsk NPP area is defined by the environmental contamination as the result of earlier activities and that in the Leningrad NPP and Kursk NPP areas is associated with the Chernobyl fallouts (91 and 14 μ Sv per year respectively). The contribution of NPPs to the existing man-made radiation background varies in a range of 1% (Rostov NPP) to 10 – 11% (Kursk NPP and Beloyarsk NPP).

### References

1. IAEA. Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards. No. GSR. Part 3. Vienna: IAEA, 2014. 436 p.
2. SP 47.13330.2016. Set of Rules. Engineering Surveys for Construction. Basic Provisions. Moscow. Minstroy Rossii Publ., 2016, 155 p. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/456045544 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021) (in Russian).
3. SP 151.13330.2012. Engineering Surveys for the Placement, Design and Construction of Nuclear Power Plants. Part I. Moscow. Minstroy Rossii Publ., 2013, 187 p. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200103172 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021) (in Russian).
4. SP 151.13330.2012. Engineering Surveys for the Placement, Design and Construction of Nuclear Power Plants. Part II. Moscow. Minstroy Rossii Publ., 2013, 155 p. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200103172 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021) (in Russian).
5. Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of July 10, 2014 No. 639 «On State Monitoring of the Radiation Situation in the Territory of the Russian Federation». Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/420207297 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021) (in Russian).
6. MR 2.6.1.27-2003. Observation Area of the Radiation Object. Organization and Implementation of Radiation Monitoring of the Environment: Guidelines. Moscow. Tekhnormativ Publ., 2007, 70 p. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200071317 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021) (in Russian).
7. MU-13.5.13-00. Organization of State Radioecological Monitoring of Agroecosystems in the Zone of Exposure to RadiationHazardous Objects. Moscow. Minselckhoz RF Publ., 2000, 28 p. (in Russian).
8. ICRP Publication 103. The Recommendation of the International Commission on Radiological Protection. Ann. ICRP. 2009, v. 38, no. 4-6, pp. 1-242.
9. Tsygvintsev P.N., Nushtaeva V.E., Dushin V.L., Anisimov V.S., Bondarenko L.G., Kuznetsov V.K., Isamov N.N. Radioecological Monitoring in the Area where the Leningrad NPP is Located. See in «Monitoring of Natural and Agricultural Ecosystems in the Areas where Nuclear Power Plants are Located», ed. S.V. Fesenko. Obninsk. VNIIRAE Publ., 2020, pp. 107-133 (in Russian).
10. Kuznetsov V.K., Sanzharova N.I., Andreeva N.V., Nushtaeva V.E., Panov A.V., Sanzharov A.I., Geshel I.V., Sidorova E.V., Kurbakov D.N., Novikova N.V., Sarukhanov A.V. Radioecological Monitoring in the Area of the Kursk NPP. See in «Monitoring of Natural and Agricultural Ecosystems in the Areas where Nuclear Power Plants are Located», ed. S.V. Fesenko. Obninsk. VNIIRAE Publ., 2020, pp. 87-106 (in Russian).
11. Isamov N.N., Sanzharova N.I., Nushtaeva V.E., Panov A.V., Kuznetsov V.K., Gubareva O.S., Aleshkina E.N., Geshel I.V., Sidorova E.V., Emlyutina E.S., Fadeev M.Yu., Muzalevskaya I.A., Ursu N.V. Radiation and Environmental Monitoring in the Area of the Rostov NPP. See in «Monitoring of Natural and Agricultural Ecosystems in the Areas where Nuclear Power Plants are Located», ed. S.V. Fesenko. Obninsk. VNIIRAE Publ., 2020, pp. 134-157 (in Russian).
12. Panov A.V., Dushin V.N., Isamov N.N., Shabalev S.I., Kuznetsov V.K., Spiridonov S.I., Karpenko E.I., Anisimov V.S., Geshel I.V., Sidorova E.V. Monitoring of Natural and Agricultural Ecosystems in the Area where the Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Plant is Located. See in «Monitoring of Natural and Agricultural Ecosystems in the Areas where Nuclear Power Plants are Located», ed. S.V. Fesenko. Obninsk. VNIIRAE Publ., 2020, pp. 67-86 (in Russian).
13. Safety Guide No. RS-G-1.8. Monitoring the Environment and Sources for Radiation Safety Purposes: IAEA Safety Standards for the Protection of People and the Environment. Vienna: IAEA, 2005,168 p. (in Russian).
14. The Radiation Situation on the Territory of Russia and Neighboring States in 2018. Yearbook. Obninsk. Rosgidromet Rossii Publ., 2019, 324 p. (in Russian).
15. SanPin 2.6.1.24-03. Sanitary Rules for the Design and Operation of Nuclear Power Plants (SP AS-03). Moscow. Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation Publ., 2003, 36 p. Available at: https://docs.cntd.ru/document/901862274 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021) (in Russian).
16. Doses of Radiation Exposure to the Population of the Russian Federation in 2018: Information Collection. St. Petersburg. NIIRG Publ., 2019, 72 p. (in Russian).
17. UNSCEAR. Sources, Effects and Risks of Ionizing Radiation. Report to the General Assembly, with Scientific Annexes. Annex B: Radiation exposures from electricity generation. New York. United Nations, 2017, pp. 135-240.
18. Vasyanovich M.E. et al. Determination of Radionuclide Composition of the Russian NPPs Atmospheric Releases and Dose Assessment to Population. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2019, v. 208-209, p. 106006. Available at: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/ S0265931X19300876 (accessed Aug. 22, 2021); DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2019.106006 .
19. IAEA. Safety Reports Series No.19. Generic Models for use in Assessing the Impact of Discharges of Radioactive Substances to the Environment. Vienna. IAEA, 2001, 229 p.
20. IAEA. Safety Reports Series No.64. Programmes and Systems for Source and Environmental Radiation Monitoring. Vienna: IAEA, 2010, 232 p.