+++

categories="article"
date="2021-12-08T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2021-04"
issue_name="2021 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/04/04.pdf"
first_page="43"
last_page="52"
udc="621.039.54(04)"
title="Study of the Efficiency of MA Transmutation in a Fast Reactor Loaded with Mixed Uranium-Torium Fuel"
original_title="Сравнение эффективности трансмутации америция в вариантах реакторов на быстрых нейтронах с уран-ториевым топливом"
authors=["KorobeynikovVV", "KolesovVV", "MihalevAV"]
tags=["transmutation", "minor actinides", "spent fuel", "uranium-thorium fuel cycle", "radioactivity", "biological hazard", "spent fuel storage"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.04"

+++

From the point of view of availability of nuclear fertile materials, the question of the involvement of thorium in the fuel cycle is not extremely urgent. However, with large-scale development of nuclear power generation turning to the use of thorium appears to be quite natural. The use of uranium-thorium fuel in a fast neutron reactor to replace conventional uranium-plutonium fuel will significantly reduce the yield of minor actinides, which makes such reactors attractive for transmutation and incineration of already accumulated and constantly increasing quantities of long-lived radioactive isotopes of americium, curium, and neptunium.

Due to the absence of uranium-233 in nature, the use of thorium in power engineering requires a closed fuel cycle. At the initial stage of the implementation of the uranium-thorium cycle, it is suggested to use uranium-235 instead of uranium-233 as nuclear fuel.

Transmutation and incineration of minor actinides in a fast neutron reactor operated in uranium-thorium fuel cycle were investigated in the present study. Several options of the structure of the cores of such a reactor were examined. It was demonstrated that heterogeneous distribution of americium in the reactor core allows obtaining higher rates of its incineration and transmutation than the homogeneous one.

### References

1. Use of Fast Reactors for Actinide Transmutation. Proc. of the Specialists Meeting Held in Obninsk. Russian Federation. 22624 September 1992. IAEA-TECDOC-693. IAEA,1993, p. 125.
2. Matveev V.I., Ivanov A.P., Efimenko E.M. Concept of Specialized Fast Reactor for Minor Actinide Burning. See in [1], p. 114.
3. Guy E.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Rabotnov N.S., Shubin Yu.N. Concept of Long-Lived Nuclear Waste Management. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 1994, no. 1, pp. 17-21 (in Russian).
4. Ganev I.Kh., Lopatkin A.V., Orlov V.V. Heterogeneous Transmutation Am, Cm, Np in the Core of a BREST-Type Reactor. Atomnaya Energiya. 2000, v. 89, iss. 5, pp. 362-365; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011334030442 (in Russian).
5. Gerasimov A.S. Kiselev G.V. Scientific and Technical Problems of Creating Electric Nuclear Installations for Transmutation of Long-Lived Radioactive Waste and Simultaneous Energy Production (Russian Experience). Fizika Elementarnykh Chastits i Atonnogo Yadra. 2001. v.32, no. 1, p. 188. Available at: http://www1.jinr.ru/Pepan/v-32-1/v-32-1-4.pdf (accessed Feb. 24, 2021(in Russian).
6. Popov V.E. Strebkov Yu.S. Sysoev A.G. Kuteev B.V. Shpansky Yu.S. Hybrid Blanket of Thermonuclear Neutron Source and its Intrinsic Physical Characteristics. Proc. of the V-th Intern. Sci. and Techn. Conf. «Innovative Projects and Technologies of Nuclear Power». October 265, 2018, Moscow. Moscow. NIKIET JSC Publ., 2018, pp. 215-217 (in Russian).
7. Fazio C., Rineiski A., Salvatores M. et al. Study on partitioning and transmutation as a possible option for spent fuel management within a nuclear phase-out scenario. Proc. of the GLOBAL 2013: International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Conference, September 29 – October 3; 2013. Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
8. Korobeinikov V.V., Karazhelevskaya Yu.E., Kolesov V.V., Terekhova A.M. Investigation of the Possibility of Am-241 Incineration and Transmutation in Ameritium-Fueled Reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 153-163; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.13 (in Russian).
9. Ivanov V.K., Chekin S.Yu., Menyaylo A.N., Maksyutov M.A., Tumanov K.A., Kashcheeva P.V., Lovachev S.S., Adamov E.O., Lopatkin A.V. Comparative Analysis of the Levels of «Radiotoxicity» of Individual Radionuclides. SNF from BREST and VVER Reactors at Different Exposure Times Based on Modern ICRP «Dose-Effect» Models. Radiatsiya i Risk. 2018, v. 27, no. 4, pp. 8-27; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2018-27-4-8-27 (in Russian).
10. KazanskyYu.A. Romanov M.I. Transmutation of Minor Actinides in the Neutron Spectrum of Thermal Neutron Reactor. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 140-146; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.15 (in Russian).
11. Alekseev P.N., Alekseev S.V., Andrianova E.A. et al. Two-component Nuclear Power System with Thermal and Fast Reactors in a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Ed. by Acad. of the RAS Ponomaryov-Stepnoy N.N. Moscow. Tekhnosfera Publ., 2016,160 p. ISBN 978-5-94836-434-6.(in Russian).
12. Alekseev S.V., Zaitsev V.A. Thorium in Nuclear Power. Moscow. Tekhnosfera Publ., 2014, 288 p. ISBN 978-5-94836-394-3 (in Russian).
13. Alekseev P.N., Vasiliev A.V., Mikityuk K.O., Subbotin S.A., Fomichenko P.A., Shchepetina T.D. Optimization of Conceptual Solutions for the Lead-Bismuth Fast Reactor RBEC-M. Atomnaya Energiya. 2004, v. 97, iss. 2, p. 115. Available at: http://www.iaea.org/NuclearPower/SMR/crpi25001.html/ (accessed Feb. 24.2021) (in Russian).
14. Leppanen Jaakko. PSG2 / SERPENT – A Continious Energy Monte-Carlo Reactor Physics Burnup Calculation Code. Helsinki. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 2015. Available at: http://montecarlo.vtt.fi/download/Serpent_manual.pdf (accessed Feb. 24.2021)