+++

categories="article"
date="2021-12-08T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2021-04"
issue_name="2021 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/04/07.pdf"
first_page="76"
last_page="84"
udc="539.16"
title="Evaluation of the Permissible 99Mo Activity in the KL-15 Container in the Design of Transportation and Process Scheme"
original_title="Оценка допустимой активности 99Mo в контейнере КЛ-15 при осуществлении транспортно-технологической схемы"
authors=["FomichevVV", "PakholikDA", "KochnovOY", "KuznetsovNV", "HaritonovMV", "NichugovskiiVV"]
tags=["molybdenum-99", "technetium-99m", "molybdenum-technetium generators", "radiation safety during transportation", "packaging kits", "KL-15 transportation container", "maximum permissible activity"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.07"

+++

Demand for the use of radioactive isotopes in medicine is increasing with each coming year necessitating the increased output of radionuclide products. One of the most widely spread radionuclides used in medicine is technetium-99m (99mТс). The very short 99mТс life (6-hour half-life) requires its production directly on the site of medical treatment. This is achieved using molybdenum-technetium generators loaded with molybdenum-99 (99Мо), which uninterruptedly decays (half-life of 66 hours) yielding-99mTc.

Close attention must be paid in the course of production of molybdenum-technetium generators to radiation safety during transportation of 99Мо on the territory of the manufacturing facility. The main measure for ensuring radiation safety during transportation of 99Мо is the application of special packaging kits. The Karpov Institute of Physical Chemistry JSC uses a wide range of packaging kits of types A and B for transportation of radioactive materials on the territory of the manufacturer with design features providing the required level of radiation safety.

In particular, the KL-15 container loaded/unloaded from the top is used for on-site transportation of 99Мо for charging molybdenum-technetium generators. Maximum permissible activity of 99Мо is not specified in the passport of KL-15 container. Planned construction of radionuclide production shop in accordance with GMP requirements will require the increase of output of target radionuclides by several times. The above considerations necessitated the evaluation of the maximum permissible activity of 99Мо planned to be transported in KL-15 containers. No other type of standard containers can be used because of their outside dimensions prohibiting the unloading of 99Мо inside the “hot” chamber. Calculation and experimental evaluation of permissible 99Мо activity during transportation inside the KL 15 container was performed.

The paper presents the calculated evaluation of the maximum permissible activity of 99Мо in a KL-15 container to ensure the radiation exposure of personnel of group A working with the container not exceeding the established level at the enterprise (80 μSv per shift) and not requiring the use of additional measures and means of protection.

The results of the work allow us drawing the conclusion that the KL-15 container ensures the required level of radiation safety with up to 241 Ki of 99Мо loaded in the container.

### References

1. Feasibility of Producing Molybdenum-99 on a Small Scale using Fission of Low Enriched Uranium or Neutron Activation of Natural Molybdenum. Technical Reports Series. 2015, no. 478, p.188. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2015. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/trs478web-32777845.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021).
2. A Supply and Demand Update of the Molybdenum'99 Market. Nuclear Energy Agency, OECD, 2012. Available at: http://www.oecd-nea.org/med-radio/docs/2012-supply-demand.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021).
3. The Supply of Medical Radioisotopes «Medical Isotope Supply in the Future: Production Capacity and Demand Forecast for the 99Mo/99mTc Market, 2015'2020». Nuclear Energy Agency, OECD, 2015. Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/jcms/pl_36035/the-supply-of-medical-radioisotopes-2015-medical-isotope-supply-review-99mo/99mtc-market-demand-and-production-capacity-projection-2015-2020 (accessed Feb. 20, 2021).
4. Kodina G.E., Krasikova R.N. Methods for Obtaining Radiopharmaceuticals and Radionuclide Generators for Nuclear Medicine. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2014, 281 p. (in Russian).
5. Non'HEU Production Technologies for Molybdenum'99 and Technetium'99m. Technical Reports No. NF-T-5.4. р.75. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2013. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1589_web.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021).
6. Generator Technetium'99, Type GK'4K. Available at: http://www.karpovipc.ru/index.php/2-uncategorised/75-generator-technecia-99t (accessed Feb. 20, 2021) (in Russian).
7. NP-053-16. Safety Rules for the Transport of Radioactive Materials. Moscow. FBU «NTTs YaRB» Publ., 2017, 111 p. Available at: https://ohranatruda.ru/upload/iblock/1cf/4293748284.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021) (in Russian).
8. Advisory Material for the IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material (2012 Edi-tion). Specific Safety Guide. No. SSG-26. IAEA, Vienna, 2014, 450 p.
9. Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material. Series of Safety Publications, No SSR'6 (Rev. 1). IAEA, Vienna, 2019, 193 p. (in Russian).
10. Freiman E.S., Shupanovskii V.D., Kaloshin V.M. Fundamentals of Safe Transport of Radioactive Substances. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 176 p. (in Russian).
11. SanPiN 2.6.1.2523-09. Radiation Safety Standards. Available at: https://www.np-ciz.ru/userfiles/2_6_1_2523-09.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021) (in Russian).
12. SP 2.6.1.2612-10. Basic Sanitary Rules for Ensuring Radiation Safety. Available at: https://orfi.ru/files/doc/uchcenter/osporb_2612612-10.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021) (in Russian).
13. Kozlov V.F. Radiation Safety: Handbook. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1977, 384 p. (in Russian).
14. Golubev B.P., Dosimetry and Protection Against Ionizing Radiation. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 464 p. (in Russian).
15. Mashkovich V.P., Kudryavtseva A.V., Protection Against Ionizing Radiation: Handbook. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1995, 496 p. (in Russian).
16. Description of the Type of Measuring Instrument. Available at: https://ntcexpert.ru/documents/docs/opis_tipa_izm.pdf (accessed Feb. 20, 2021) (in Russian).