+++

categories="article"
date="2021-12-08T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2021-04"
issue_name="2021 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/04/09.pdf"
first_page="99"
last_page="109"
udc="681.514"
title="Mathematical Simulation of an Automatic Steam Turbine Control System"
original_title="Математическое моделирование системы автоматического регулирования паровой турбины"
authors=["TrofimovMA", "MurachovEG", "RogozaAA", "EgupovND"]
tags=["power turbine", "mathematical model", "nonlinear automatic control system", "stability of control process", "control algorithm"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.09"

+++

The paper considers the construction of a mathematical model for an electrohydraulic system to control automatically the Т-63-13,0/0,25 product manufactured by JSC Kaluga Turbine Plant. Mathematical simulation of control systems makes it possible to improve considerably the quality of control, that is, the accuracy and reliability of such systems, as well as to accelerate greatly the development and calculation of the control system and the parameters of its individual components. The T-63-13,0/0,25 mathematical model of the ASTCS allows estimating the effects of design parameters during any load dropping (in a range of 0 to 100%) and the quality of control for the monitored parameters both in the process of operation as part of an isolated power system (generator output, frequency) and an integrated power system (generator output). A mathematical representation has been developed in the model for the control units, the T-63-13,0/0,25 product model, and the electronic controlling part of each of the control units. It has been proposed that pulse-width modulation be used to control the synchronous motors which makes it possible to control the synchronous machine shaft speed by changing the supply voltage frequency. To this end, the control system’s model uses a frequency converter which is proposed to be used in the real control system. The developed control system with one adjustable steam extraction in the T-63-13,0/0,25 steam turbine is coupled and autonomous, that is, each of the two meters for the turbine’s controlled parameters has effect on both steam distribution systems such that a deviation for one of the controlled parameters does not lead to excitations in the other.

### References

1. Steam Turbine Unit T263213.0/0.25. List of Monitored Parameters. 1022M201192. Kaluga. Kaluga Turbine Works JSC, 2008, 33 p. (in Russian).
2. Technical Requirements for Equipping a Steam Turbine T263213.0/0.25 Manufactured by KTZ JSC with an Electronic Control Part Of an Electro2Hydraulic Automatic Control System. 1012М201765ТТ. Kaluga. Kaluga Turbine Works JSC, 2008, 56 p. (in Russian).
3. Weinstein R.A., Kolomiets N.V., Shestakova V.V. Mathematical Models of Elements of Electric Power Systems in the Calculations of Steady2State Modes and Transient Processes. Tomsk. Tomsky Polytekhnichesky Universitet Publ., 2010, 115 p. (in Russian).
4. Vinogradov A.B. Vector Control of AC Electric Drives. Ivanovo. Ivanovsky Gosudarstvenny Energetichesky Universitet n.a. V.I. Lenin Publ., 2008, 298 p. (in Russian).
5. Egupov N.D., Pupkov K.A., Rogoza A.A., Trofimov M.A. Algorithmic Theory of Control Systems based on Spectral Methods. Vol. 2. Matrix Computing Technologies Based on Integral Equations. Ed. Matveeva V.A. Moscow. N.E. Bauman MGTU Publ., 2014, 464 p. (in Russian).
6. Trofimov A.I., Trofimov M.A., Rogoza A.A., Egupov N.D. Results of Tests of a Steam-Turbine Installation of a Floating NPP. Tyazhyoloye Mashinostroyeniye. 2013, no. 10, pp. 20-23 (in Russian).
7. Rutily B. Multiple Scattering Theory and Integral Equations. Integral Methods in Science and Engineering. Eds. C. Constanda, M. Ahues, and A. Largillier. Birkhauser, Boston, 2004, pp. 211-232; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-8176-8184-5_34 .
8. Amosov A., Panasenko G. Asymptotic Analysis and Asymptotic Domain Decomposition for an Integral Equation of the Radiative Transfer Type. J. Math. Pures Appl. 2005, v. 84, pp. 1813-1831; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpur.2005.01.005 .
9. Nunes A.L., Vasconcelos P.B., Ahues M. Error Bounds for Low-Rank Approximations of the First Exponential Integral Kernel. Numerical Functional Analysis and Optimization. 2013, v. 34, no. 1, pp. 74-93; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/01630563.2012.707866 .
10. Trofimov M.A., Rogoza A.A. Algorithm for the Synthesis of Robust Controllers for Nonlinear Systems with Parametric Uncertainty Based on Projection-Matrix Methods. Nauchno-Tekhnichesky Vestnik Povolzh’ya. 2013, no. 4, pp. 244-246 (in Russian).
11. Pupkov K.A., Egupov N.D., Makarenkov A.M., Trofimov A.I. Theory and Computer Methods for Studying Stochastic Systems. Moscow. Fizmatlit Publ., 2003, 400 p. (in Russian).
12. Amosov A., Panasenko G., Rutily B. An Approximate Solution to the Integral RadiativeттTransfer Equation in an Optically Thick Slab. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris. Ser. Mecanique. 2003, v. 331, pp. 823-828; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crme.2003.09.007 .
13. Rutily B., Chevallier L. The Nite Laplace Transform for Solving a Weakly Singular Integral Equation Occurring in Transfer Theory. Journal of Integral Equations and Applications. 2004, v. 16, no. 4, pp. 389-409; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1216/jiea/1181075298 .
14. Tatarinova N.V., Efros E.I., Sushchikh V.M. Results of Calculation on Mathematical Models of Variable Operating Modes of Cogeneration Steam Turbine Plants in Real Operating Conditions. Perspektivy Nauki. 2014, no. 3 (54), pp. 95-100 (in Russian).
15. Kirillov P.L., Yuryev Yu.S., Bobkov V.P. Handbook of Thermohydraulic Calculations: Nuclear Reactors, Heat Exchangers, Steam Generators. Ed. P.L. Kirillov. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 296 p. (in Russian).
16. D’Almeida F.D., Ahues M., Fernandes R. Errors and Grids for Projected Weakly Singular Integral Equations. Int. J. Pure Appl. Math. 2013, v. 89, no. 2, pp. 203-213; DOI: https://doi.org/10.12732/ijpam.v89i2.6 .
17. Marchuk G.I., Agoshkov V.I. Introduction to Projection-Grid Methods. Moscow. Nauka. Fizmatlit Publ., 1981, 416 p. (in Russian).
18. Kantorovich L.V. Functional Analysis and Applied Mathematics. Uspekhi Matematicheskikh Nauk. 1948, v. 3, iss. 6 (28), pp. 89-185 (in Russian).
19. Kazantsev A.A. Turbine Stage Model. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy.
Yadernaya Energetika. – 2009, no. 3, pp. 208-216. Available at: https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/journals/2009/03.pdf (accessed Jun. 29, 2021) (in Russian).
20. Kornyushin Yu.P., Melnikov D.V., Egupov N.D., Kornyushin P.Yu. Synthesis of an Additional Regulator for Stabilizing the Angular Velocity of a Steam Turbine Rotor. Vestnik N.E. Bauman MGTU. Ser. Estestvennye Nauki. 2015, no. 5 (62); DOI: https://doi.org/10.18698/1812-3368-2015-5-100-112 (in Russian).