+++

categories="article"
date="2021-12-08T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2021-04"
issue_name="2021 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2021/04/10.pdf"
first_page="110"
last_page="121"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Phenomenology of Acoustic Standing Waves Applied to the VVER-1200 Reactor Plant"
original_title="Феноменология акустических стоячих волн применительно к реакторной установке ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Povarov V.P., Slepov M.T."]
tags=["acoustic standing wave", "VVER-1200", "pressure pulsation detector", "reactor coolant pump", "main circulation circuit", "autospectral power density", "cross-spectral power density", "core", "technical diagnostics"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.10"

+++

Underexplored issues of acoustic standing waves (ASW) in the main circulation circuits of the VVER reactor plants are considered. It is a long time that no proper attention has been given to this phenomenon both on the part of the research community and NPP experts. In the general case, generation of ASWs requires that the medium is acoustically heterogeneous in the planes perpendicular to the direction of the longitudinal wave propagation in which an acoustic impedance jump occurs, this having been shown by the authors based on an example of the wave equation solution (D’Alembert equation) for a certain function of two variables. An ASW classification has been developed based on the obtained experimental material, 6 ASW types have been described, and their key parameters have been defined. Amplitude distributions have been plotted for all major ASW types proceeding from the phase relations of signals from the pressure pulsation detectors and accelerometers installed on the MCC pipelines. These distributions are of a general nature and are valid for all VVER types. It is for the first time that the globality of all lowest ASW types have been identified. Four properties of ASWs have been formulated as their attributes. The first attribute is regular ASW temperature dependences, this being the source of diagnostic information in the process of the VVER unit heatup/cooldown. Linear experimental dependences of the ASW frequencies on the coolant temperature have been obtained. Frequencies have been found experimentally which lead to the MCC resonant excitation due to the coalescence of the ASW frequencies with the RCP rotational frequency harmonics. The ASW energy, which owes its origin to the RCP operation, has been estimated. The RCP operation can be presented as continuous generation of pressure pulsations which fall onto the acoustic path heterogeneities in the form of a traveling wave and generate a standing wave after being reflected from these.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Usanov A.I. Vibration Noise Diagnostics of VVER. Edited by A.A. Abagyan. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2004, 344 p. (in Russian)/
2. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. VVER Diagnostic Systems. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2010. 391 p. (in Russian).
3. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. et al. Creation of Software and Technical Complexes for Diagnosing Equipment of NPP Power Units Under Construction. Proc. of the II All-Russian Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPP with VVER». November 19-23, 2001. Podolsk. OKB Gidropress Publ., pp. 72-75 (in Russian).
4. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. et al. The State and Prospects of Using Operational Diagnostic Systems to Maintain the Safety of Power Units with VVER. Proc. of the II All-Russian Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of NPP with VVER». November 19-23, 2001. Podolsk. OKB Gidropress Publ., pp. 29-31 (in Russian).
5. Arkadov G.V., Matveev V.P., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. Software and hardware complex of the system of vibration-noise diagnostics of the RU VVER. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2002, iss. 3. pp. 37-45 (in Russian).
6. Arkadov G.V. Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T. Vibroacoustics in the Annexes to the Installation of Reactor VVER-1200. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2018, 469 p., ISBN 978-5-02-040138-9 (in Russian).
7. Arkadov G.V. Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T. Vibration Acoustics Applied to VVER-1200 Reactor Plant. Singapore. World Scientific, 2021, 586 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1142/12220 .
8. Katona T.J. Possibility of use of noise analysis for identification of reactor conditions during accidents. World Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2013, v. 3, no. 3, pp. 96-105. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4236/wjnst.2013.33017 .
9. Demaziere C. Multi-Physics Modelling of Nuclear Reactors: Current Practices in a Nutshell. Int. J. Nucl. Energy Science and Technology. 2013, v. 7(4), pp. 288-318; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1504/IJNEST.2013.054368 .
10. Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T., Khayretdinov V.U. The Experience of Complex Measurements with the Use of Heterogeneous Systems at Various Stages of the Start-Up of the VVER-1200 Power Unit. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 4, pp.44-54; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.4.05 (in Russian).
11. Fedorov A.I., Slepov M.T. Complex Measurements of Diagnostic Parameters of Equipment at Unit 1 of NWPP-2 During Pilot Operation. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 77-87; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.07 (in Russian).
12. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Slepov M.T. Vibroacoustics of VVER-1200. Proc. of the XI International Scientific and Technical Conference «Ensuring the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER». May 21-24, 2019. Podolsk. OKB Gidropress Publ. Available at: http://www.gidropress.podolsk.ru/files/proceedings/mntk2019/documents/mntk2019-061.pdf (accessed Aug. 15, 2021) (in Russian).
13. IEC 61502:1999 Nuclear plants. Pressurized Water Reactors. Vibration monitoring of internal structures. 1999. Available at: https://webstore.ansi.org/preview-pages/IEC/preview_iec61502%7Bed1.0%7Db.pdf (accessed Aug. 15, 2021).
14. Rohde U., Kliem S., Grundmann U. et al. The Reactor Dynamics Code DYN3D – Models, Validation and Applications. Progr. Nucl. Energy. 2016, v. 89, p. 170; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.02.013 .
15. Kozmenkov Y., Kliem S., Rohde U. Validation and Verification of the Coupled Neutron Kinetic/Thermalhydraulic System Code DYN3D/ATHLET. Ann. Nucl. Energy. 2015, v. 84, PP. 153-165. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2014.12.012 .
16. Demaziere C., Pazsit I. Development of a Method for Measuring the Moderator Temperature Coefficient by Noise Analysis and its Experimental Verification in Ringhals-2. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 2004, v. 148, pp. 1-29; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NSE04-A2437 .
17. Andersson T., Demaziere C., Nagy A. et al. Development and Application of Core Diagnostics and Monitoring for the Ringhals PWRs. Progr. Nucl. Energy. 2003, v. 43, no. 1, pp. 35-41; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-1970(03)00006-4 .