+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:23:53+03:00"
issue="2015-04"
issue_name="2015 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file="pdf/2015/04/2015-04-article-02.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="19"
udc="621.039.534.63"
title="Sodium purification systems for NPP with fast reactors (retrospective and perspective views)"
original_title="Системы очистки натрия АЭС с реакторами на быстрых нейтронах (ретроспективно- перспективный взгляд)"
authors=["KozlovFA", "SorokinAP", "KonovalovMA"]
tags=["purification system", "cold trap", "hot trap", "filter", "impurities", "oxygen", "hydrogen", "corrosion products", "diffusion", "heat and mass transfer", "heater"]
rubric = "Сurrentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.02"

+++

Coolant purification system is an essential part of any nuclear facility. The lack of experience with in-vessel purification systems in our country poses a series of tasks, one of them is to increase the effectiveness and capacity of such systems. A retrospective analysis of the purification systems in reactors from BR-5 to BN-1200, among them cold traps and cesium sorbents that ensure successful operation of sodium-cooled fast reactor NPPs, hot traps to be used for sodium purification from oxygen at NPPs has shown improvement potential of these systems. Based on the results of this work, recommendations for the directions of work toward improvement of characteristics of sodium purification systems for perspective NPPs with sodium coolant are given. The cold trap should be a mandatory element of the in-vessel primary coolant purification system. Hot traps can ensure the primary loop sodium purification from oxygen at NPP nominal operation, as well at lay regimes with heated coolant. Optimal solutions for removing radioactive impurities and non-radioactive products of corrosion from sodium coolant require goal-oriented R&D programs.

### References

1. Zhidkie metally: ot pervogo teplofizicheskogo stenda k krupnomasshtabnoj atomnoj energetike [Liquid metals: from first thermophisical test facility to the large-scale nuclear engineering]. Sb. statej pod red. A.D. Efanova, F.A. Kozlova [Paper collection under the editorship of A.D. Efanov, F.A. Kozlov]. Obninsk.: SSC RF-IPPE Publ., 2001 (in Russian).
2. Parkins V. Eksperimental’nyj natrievyj reactor. [Experimental sodium reactor]. Doklady mezhdunarodnoj konferentsii po mirnomu isspol’zovaniyu atomnoj energii, Zheneva, 1955 [Reports of the international conference on peace use of an atomic energy, Geneva, 1955]. Moscow. Gosenergo izdat Publ., 1956, pp. 208-263 (in Russian).
3. Kirillov P.L., Kozlov F.A., Subbotin V.I., Turchin N.M. Ochistka natrija ot okislov i kontrol’ za ih soderzhaniem [Removal of oxides from sodium and tests for the oxide content]. Atomic Energy.1960, v. 8, no. 1, p. 30 (in Russian).
4. Levich V.G. Fiziko-himicheskaya gidrodinamika [Physical and chemical hydrodynamics]. Moscow. Fizmatgiz Publ., 1959 (in Russian).
5. Kozlov F.A., Volchkov L.G., Kuznetsov E.K., Matyukhin V.V. Zhidkometallicheskie teplonositeli YaEU. Ochistka ot primesej i ih kontrol’ [Liquid metal coolant for NPP. Purification from impurity and their control] / Under the editorship of F.A. Kozlov. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1983 (in Russian).
6. Kozlov F.A., Volchkov L.G. Novyj sposob regeneracii lovushek dlja ochistki shhelochnyh metallicheskih teplonositelej [A new method of regeneration of traps for the purification of alkali-metal coolants] // Atomic Energy. 1975, v. 39, no. 4, p. 310 (in Russian).
7. Alekseev V.V., Kovalyov Yu.P., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Kumaev V.Ya., Kondrat’ev A.S., Matyukhin V.V., Pirogov E.P., Sergeev G.P., Sorokin A.P., Torbenkova I.Yu. Sistemy ochistki natrievogo teplonositelya AES s reaktorom BN-1200 [Purification systems of the sodium coolant for NPP with BN-1200 reactor]. Thermal Engineering. 2013, no. 5, pp. 9-20 (in Russian).
8. Bakanov M., Potapov O. 30-letnij opyt promyshlennoj ekspluatatsii reaktora BN-600 [30-year-old experience of commercial operation of BN-600 reactor]. Doklad na IX Mezhdunarodnoj nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferentsii «BN-600 – 30 let» [The report at IX International scientific and technical conference «BN-600 – 30 years»]. Zarechnyj. 07.02.2011. Avaiable at: http://energyland.info/analitic-show-51526 (in Russian).
9. Rinejskij A.A. Inzhiniring energobloka s reaktorom na bystryh nejtronah BN-800 [Engineering of power-generating unit with BN-800 fast reactor]. Atomic Energy. 2006, no. 23, pp. 23-25 (in Russian).
10. Kozlov F.A., Kuznetsov E.K. Ochistka natriya ot kisloroda s pomosch’yu goryachih lovushek [Purification of sodium from oxygen by means of hot traps] / V Sb. «Zhidkie metally» [In collection «Liquid metals»]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1967, pp. 340-354 (in Russian).
11. Kozlov F.A., Alekseev V.V., Kovalev Yu.P., Kumaev V.Ya., Matjukhin V.V., Orlova E.A., Pirogov E.P., Sorokin A.P., Scherbakov S.I. Issledovaniya v obosnovanie sistemy ochistki natriya dlya bystryh reaktorov [Studies validating a sodium purification system for fast reactors]. Atomic Energy. 2012, v. 112, no. 1, pp. 18-24 (in Russian).
12. Papovyants A.K., Ashadullin R.Sh., Yagodkin I.V., Alekseev V.V., Bogdanovich N.G., Skomorohova S.N., Voronin I.A. Stendovye ispytaniya novyh sorbtsionno-fil’truyushhih i getternyh materialov dlya ochistki natrievogo teplonositelya [Test on test facility of new sorbtsion filtrating and getter materials for sodium coolant purification] // Sbornik dokladov nauchno-tehnicheskoj konferencii «Teplofizika-2013» [The collector of reports on scientific and technical conference «Thermal physics-2013»]. Obninsk. ONTI SSC RF-IPPE Publ. 2014, pp. 421-428 (in Russian).
13. Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Konovalov M.A. Ochistka getterami zhidkometallicheskih sistem s natrievym teplonositelem ot kisloroda [Purification by getters of liquid metal systems with the sodium coolant from oxygen]. Thermal Engineering. 2015. – V pechati (in Russian).
14. Chechetkin Yu.V., Kizin V.D., Polyakov V.I. Radiatsionnaya bezopasnost’ AES s bystrym reaktorom i natrievym teplonositelem [Radiation safety of NPP with fast reactor and sodium coolant]. Moscow. Energoamtoizdat Publ., 1983 (in Russian).