+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:21:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file="pdf/2015/02/2015-02-article-03.pdf"
first_page="32"
last_page="38"
udc="621.039"
title="Investigation of the dependence testimony sector control system leak fuel cladding BN-600 reactor on the operational parameters"
original_title="Исследование зависимости показаний секторной системы контроля герметичности оболочек твэлов реактора БН-600 от эксплуатационных параметров"
authors=["AlbutovaOI", "LukyanovDA"]
tags=["BN-600", "sectoral monitoring system leak fuel cladding", "background readings", "delayedneutrons", "capacity", "temperature", "detection unit", "regression model", "an average approximation error", "bar chart"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.03"

+++

The problem of determining the background of indications of measuring channels of the sector control tightness claddings (SSKGO) (evidence in the absence of the defect), which significantly depend on the location of the control points and the operational parameters of the reactor is relevant for fast reactors. The ability to predict the estimated background opens up prospects for further development of the sector CLC, improve its technical and metrological characteristics.

The dependence of readings SSKGO BN-600 on the operational parameters and the development of a regression model predicting SSKGO background readings. Process performance. 1) Formation of the list of parameters of the regression model for determining background level measuring channel SSKGO. Along with the power of the reactor, the temperature in the detection unit (DB) and the time to start mikrokampanii in the model included the estimated value of the temperature outside of the database, which is proportional to the temperature increment in the database. 2) Determination of the coefficients of the regression model was performed by least squares (OLS) using stepwise regression with the sequential addition of para-meters. The criterion for inclusion of a parameter in the model was to reduce the value of the average approximation error e and normalization of residual distribution model. Data processing was carried out using MS Excel, MS Access, VBA.

Modeling results show that all parameters are statistically significant. In the prediction error of the model developed SSKGO background readings in all areas given one-governmental mikrokampanii reactor BN-600 is less than 1%, which meets the original requirements.

The research background depending on the operational parameters of the reactor have scientific novelty – earlier similar studies have not been published, and practical significance. Upon completion of testing the model developed at enhancing the operational data, will decide on the implementation of the technique as part of SSKGO rectors of the BN-600 and BN-800.

### References

1. Dvornikov P.A., Kovtun S.N., Lukyanov D.A., Skomorokhov A.O., Zhilkin A.S., Yugov S.I. Comprehensive analysis of the data in the system of fuel cladding leak test of the reactor BN-800. XII Mezhdunarodnajakonferencija «Bezopasnost’ AJeSipodgotovkakadrov». Tezisy dokladov. [XII Conference «NPP Safety and Training». Abstracts]. Obninsk, 2011. INPE NRNU “MEPhI», p. 89 (in Russian).
2. Dvornikov P.A., KovtunS.N., Lukyanov D.A., Shutov S.S., Zhilkin A.S. Methods of localization of defective fuel assemblies in the reactor MBIR. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2013, no. 3, pp. 24-33 (in Russian).
3. Dvornikov P.A., Kovtun S.N., Lukyanov D.A., Shutov S.S., Zhilkin A.S. The program localization FA with fuel leaking fuel rods in the reactor MBIR on the testimony of the sensor-delayed neutrons. Certificate of state registration of the computer Number 2014613853 on April 9, 2014 (in Russian).
4. Baklushin R.P. Technology NPP with sodium coolant. (History of the development and operating experience). –Obninsk,ONTI GNC RF-FEI Publ. 2012. 300 p. (in Russian).
5. Petrunin J.J. Information technology analysis. Data analysis: tutorial. 2-nd edition. Moscow. SAM Publ., 2010. 292 p. (in Russian).
6. Lomakin S.S. Nuclear-physical methods of diagnostics and monitoring nuclear reactor cores. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986. 119 p. (in Russian).
7. LopatinY.V. The automated system of technical inspection of fuel elements reactors BN-type. Nuclear power plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, no.7, pp. 62-70 (in Russian).