+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:19:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="05"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/02/05.pdf"
first_page="49"
last_page="59"
udc="629.9+544(075)"
title="Stand-alone hydrogen generator based on the chemical decomposition of water by aluminum"
original_title="Автономный генератор водорода на основе химического разложения воды алюминием"
authors=["MilinchukVK", "KlinshpontER", "BelozerovVI"]
tags=["hydrogen", "water", "aluminum", "aluminum oxide", "stand-alone hydrogen generator"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.05"

+++

Developing of stand-alone hydrogen generator (AGV) based on the chemical decomposition of water in heterogeneous compositions containing finely dispersed powder aluminum and crystalline sodium metasilicate. The kinetics of accumulation of hydrogen depends on the presence in the reaction medium of oxygen, which is manifested in the presence of an induction period. The nature of the kinetic regularities of hydrogen in the presence of oxygen significantly depends on the ratio of reaction rates, oxidation and activation of the aluminium surface. The design of the AGV and the optimal composition of heterogeneous compositions allow to obtain the theoretically maximum hydrogen yield (0.12 kg per 1 kg of aluminum) at a rate of from 0.01 to 1.5 l/min, at a flow rate of 0.01 to 0.1 m3/h and a duration of generation from 0.1 to 12 hours. AGV in an environmentally safe and energy-saving mode allows to get pure hydrogen fuel hydrogen content 98%, carbon dioxide ~ 0.03 % of carbon monoxide ~ 5⋅10–5 %. All chemical ingredients to produce hydrogen by AGV are chemically safe and stored under normal conditions for a long time. The wide availability of chemicals allows to consider designed AGV as lane-looking source of hydrogen for different consumers. Production of hydrogen using AGV has a number of technical, economic, environmental and social advantages compared with other methods of producing hydrogen when considering the level of integration costs for the implementation of all hydrogen technological chain: production, storage, transportation, distribution and final consumption.

### References

1. Shejndlin A.E., Zhuk A.Z.. Koncepciya alyumovodorodnoj energetiki. Rossijskij himicheskij zhurnal. 2006, v. L, no. 6, pp. 105 – 108 (in Russian).
2. Shkolnikov E. I., Yakushko C. A., Tarasov S. A., Parmuzin A. V., Ilyukhin S. A., Sheindlin A. E. Issledovanie raboty alyumovodnogo mikrogeneratora vodoroda dlya kompaktnyhistochnikov pitaniya. Elektrohimicheskaya energetika. 2008, v. 8, no. 2, pp. 86 – 91 (in Russian).
3. Bajmakov A.Yu., Petrovich S. Yu., Lipin V.A., Shahmin A.L., Eremin E.A.. Generaciya vodoroda pri vzaimodejstvii poroshkov metallov i splavov sistemy alyuminij - magnij s vodoj, s kislotnym i shhelochnym rastvorom. Nauchno4tehnicheskie vedomosti Sankt-Peterburgskogo gosudarstvennogo politehnicheskogo universiteta. 2(171) 2013, pp. 151 – 157 (in Russian).
4. Tarasov B.P., Lotockij M.V. Vodorodnaya energetika: proshloe, nastoyaschee, vidy na buduschee. Rossijskij himicheskij zhurnal. 2006, v. L, no. 6, pp. 5 – 18 (in Russian).
5. Nazarov R.S., Kuc S.D., Kravchenko O.V., Fokina E.E., Tarasov B.P. Vodorodgeneriruyuschie materialy dlya istochnikov vodoroda gidroliznogo tipa. Al’ternativnaya energetika i ekologija. ISJAEE. 2010, no. 6, pp. 26 – 33 (in Russian).
6. Milinchuk V.K., Shilina A.S., Anan’eva O.A., Kunicyna T.E., Pasevich O.F., Laricheva T.E. Issledovanie ekologicheski bezopasnyh, energosberegayuschih sposobov polucheniya vodoroda himicheskim razlozhenie vody. Al’ternativnaja jenergetika i jekologija. ISJAEE. 2012, no. 4, pp. 49 – 54 (in Russian).
7. Milinchuk V.K., Belozerov V.I., Anan’eva O.A., Laricheva T.E., Kunicyna T.E. Himicheskoe razlozhenie vody na vodorod v geterogennyh alyuminijsoderzhaschih kompoziciyah. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2014, no. 4, pp. 32 – 38 (in Russian).
8. Klinshpont E.R., Roschektaev B.M., Milinchuk V.K. Kinetika nakopleniya vodoroda pri himicheskom razlozhenii vody v geterogennyh kompoziciyah. Al’ternativnaya energetika i ekologija. ISJAEE. 2012, no. 9, pp. 116 – 120 (in Russian).
9. Patent no. 2 371 382 RF. MPK S01V 3/08. Gidroreakcionnaya kompoziciya dlya polucheniya vodoroda. / Milinchuk V.K. , Merkov S.M. Bul. 2009, no. 30 (in Russian).
10. Patent no. 2 417 157 RF. MPK S01V 3/08. Gidroreakcionnaja geterogennaja kompozicija dlja poluchenija vodoroda. / Milinchuk V.K., Shilina A.S. Bul. 2011, no. 12 (in Russian).
11. Milinchuk V.K., Klinov D.A. Vodorodnaya energetika. Uchebnoe posobie. Obninsk. IATE Publ., 2008. 68 p. (in Russian).
12. Patent no. 2 510 876 RF. MPK S01V 3/08. Avtonomnyj generator vodoroda. / Milinchuk V.K., Roschektaev B.M. Bul. 2014, no. 10 (in Russian).