+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:15:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="09"
file="/pdf/2015/02/2015-02-article-09.pdf"
first_page="88"
last_page="95"
udc="621.039.37"
title="Experience of computer technology usage within university training for future specialists of nuclear power plants under the «university-enterprise» program"
original_title="Опыт применения компьютерных технологий в вузовской подготовке будущих специалистов для АЭС по программе «ВУЗ-предприятие»"
authors=["SemenovVK", "VolmanMA", "ZhuravlyovaVS"]
tags=["NPP", "WWER", "training of personnel", "mathematical modeling", "numerical experiments", "computer and full'scale simulators", "xenon oscillations", "xenon stability in a nuclear reactor"]
rubric = "training"
rubric_name = "Personnel training"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.09"

+++

The article deals with the aspects of training program for future specialists of nuclear power plants. This program is realized at NPP Department of Ivanovo State Power University and Kalinin NPP. The usage of computer and simulation modeling at the university and the program «8'th term» are the main components of this concept. In the context of the «8'th term» students study at the training unit of the station. They get practical skills in the workshops and pass the exams. Computer modeling is used for numerical experiments on the kinetics of nuclear reactors in Mathcad. The complex of programs and methodological support for simulation of transients in nuclear reactors are designed. The mathematical model for determining the xenon stability in a nuclear reactor is described in detail. The numerical experiments on modeling of xenon oscillations in a nuclear reactor are carried out. The simulation results agree with the results of pilot experiments. Simulation modeling of the technological processes is carried out on the computer and full'scale simulator of WWER'1000. The programs and methodological support for the simulation on the computer and full'scale simulator of neutron'physical reactor measurements and the start'up ' shutdown process are designed too. A thorough knowledge of physical experiment techniques during university study is one of the most urgent tasks in training for future specialists. The training complex contributes to form professional thinking. Also it is an effective means of personal forming for the future specialist. The proposed approach allows reducing the adaptation terms for graduates in their workplaces.

### References

1. Zhuravleva V.S. Organizaсiya praktiki na Kalininskoо AES: proekt «8 semestr» [Organization of practice at Kalinin NPP: “8-th semester» project]. Tezisy dokladov IX Mezhdunarodnoj nauchno-tekhnicheskoj konferencii «Bezopasnost’, effektivnost’ i ekonomika atomnoj energetiki». Moscow, 2014, pp. 251–252 (in Russian).
2. Korovin Yu.A., Tikhonenko A.V. Sovremennye komp’yuternye tehnologii v podgotovke specialistov yaderno-energeticheskogo profilya i nauchnyh issledovaniyah [Modern computer technologies in research and training for nuclear energy specialists]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2011, no. 2, pp. 188–193.
3. Naumov V.I., Smirnov V.E. Modelirovanie nestaсionarnyh i avarijnyh proсessov v yadernyh energeticheskih ustanovkakh: laboratornyj praktikum [Simulation of transient and emergency processes in nuclear reactors: computer training]. Moscow, MIFI Publ., 2007. 104 p. (in Russian).
4. Kryakvin L.V. Sbornik programm dlya raschyota kinetiki i dinamiki yadernogo reaktora (Collection of programs for calculation of the kinetics and dynamics of nuclear reactor) Available at: http://www.exponenta.ru/educat/systemat/kryakvin/index.asp. (accessed 1 Jun. 2015).
5. Semenov V.K. Kinetika yadernyh reaktorov: metodicheskie materialy dlya provedeniya komp’yuternogo laboratornogo praktikuma [Kinetics of nuclear reactors: methodical materials for computer training]. Ivanovo, IGEU Publ., 2013. 52 p. (in Russian).
6. Semenov V.K., Vol’man M.A. Programmnyj kompleks simulyacii perehodnyh processov v yadernyh reaktorah [Program complex of transient simulation in nuclear reactors]. Svidetel’stvo № 2014618789, 2014 (in Russian).
7. Semenov V.K., Vol’man M.A. Reaktornye izmereniya: metodicheskie materialy dlya provedeniya komp’yuternogo laboratornogo praktikuma [Reactor dimensions: methodical materials for computer training]. Ivanovo, IGEU Publ., 2014. 80 p. (in Russian).
8. Vol’man M.A. Pusk i ostanov energobloka VVER-1000: metodicheskie materialy dlya provedeniya laboratornogo praktikuma [Start-up and shutdown of WWER-1000: methodical materials for laboratory training]. Ivanovo, IGEU Publ., 2014. 60 p. (in Russian).
9. Kraynov Yu.A., Dukhovenskiy A.S., Astakhov S.A. Obzor eksperimentov issledovaniya aksial’nyh ksenonovyh kolebanij v aktivnoj zone reaktora VVER-1000 [The review of an axial xenon oscillations research in the core of WWER-1000]. VANT, Ser. Fizika i tekhnika yadernyh reaktorov, iss. 1, 1987, pp. 36–37.
10. Semenov V.K., Vol’man M.A. K voprosu o ksenonovyh kolebaniyah v yadernom reaktore [About xenon oscillations in nuclear reactor]. Vestnik IGEU. 2015, iss. 2, pp. 15–20 (in Russian).