+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:13:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="11"
file="pdf/2015/02/2015-02-article-11.pdf"
first_page="108"
last_page="116"
udc="611.036.546.3"
title="The influence of axial-burnup distribution on Keff for casks with spent fuel"
original_title="Влияние аксиального распределения глубины выгорания ОТВС на значение Kэфф контейнеров с отработавшим ядерным топливом"
authors=["VnukovVS", "KulikovVI", "ChkuaseliLI"]
tags=["burnup", "nuclear safety", "spent fuel", "cask", "storage", "transportation", "axial-burnup", "distribution"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.11"

+++

This article presents axial burnup data and evaluates the effects of axial-burnup on Keff for american cask GBC-32 storage and transportation spent fuel PWR and russian cask TUK-6 spent fuel VVER-440. The concept of taking credit for the reduction in reactivity due to fuel burnup is commonly referred to as «burnup credit». The reduction in reactivity that occurs with fuel burnup is due to the change concentration of fissile nuclides and the production of actinide and fissile-product neutron absorbers. This reduction reactivity is dependent upon the axial and horizontal variation of burnup. The horizontal variation of burnup has been investigated elsewhere and shown to have a relatively minor in part on neutron multiplication in a typical burnup credit. In contrast, the axial burnup profile has a significant impact on reactivity and therefore is an impotent of a burnup credit safety analisis. Great number axial profiles different assemblies PWR and VVER-440 was performed to evaluate. The difference in the neutron multiplication factor (Keff) between a calculation of axial-burnup distribution and a calculation that assumes uniform axial-burnup has become known as end effect (ΔK).

Cask GBC-32 have neutron absorbers. Cask TUK-6 have not neutron absorbers. The end effect increases with burnup and becomes positive at burnup higher 20 GWd/MTU.

ΔK becomes negative for burnup from 10 to 40 GWd/MTU for cask TUK-6 in water density from 0.1 to 0.9 g/cm3. This conclusion is possible used in nuclear safety analysis TUK-6 in normal and accident situation.

### References

1. Wagner J.C., DeHart M.D., Parks C.V. Recommendations for Addressing Axial Burnup in PWR Burnup Credit Analyses. NUREG/CR-6801. ORNL. 2003 г.
2. Hegyi G.Influence of the Axial Burnup Credit Application in VVER System. ICNC-99. France. 1999. p. 1654.
3. Attestacionnyj pasport programmnogo sredstva. Nazvanie programmnogo sredstva: BIPR-7А (Versiya 1.5). Registrasionnyj nomer pasporta attestacii PС: № 241. Data vydachi 23.09.2008. Razrabotchik: RNC «Kurchatovskiyi institut» (in Russian).
4. Attestacionnyj pasport programmnogo sredstva. Nazvanie programmnogo sredstva: PERMAK-А (Versiya 1.5). Registrasionnyj nomer pasporta attestacii PС: № 240. Data vydachi 23.09.2008. Razrabotchik: RNC «Kurchatovskiyi institut» (in Russian).
5. Attestacionnyj pasport programmnogo sredstva. Nazvanie programmnogo sredstva: TWC-RАD (Versiya 1.0). Registrasionnyj nomer pasporta attestacii PС: № 282. Data vydachi 09.12.2010. Razrabotchik: NIC «Kurchatovskiyi institut».
6. Polevoi V.B., Tarasova O.B. Bazovyj paket kompleksa programm MMKFK-2 dlya raschyota metodom Monte-Karlo zadach perenosa neitronov v fizike reactorov. Attestacionnyj passport PS No. 134. RNC «Kurchatovskiyi institut» (in Russian).