+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:12:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="12"
file = "https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2015/02/12.pdf"
first_page="117"
last_page="125"
udc="621.039.526"
title="Improvement the value of sodium void reactivity effect of the fast neutron reactor by the instrumentality of the Monte Carlo code"
original_title="Уточнение величины натриевого пустотного эффекта реактивности в быстрых натриевых реакторах с помощью программ Монте-Карло"
authors=["MaslovPA", "MatveevVI", "MalyshevaIV"]
tags=["fast reactors", "mixed oxide fuel", "mixed nitride fuel", "sodium void reactivity effect", "fuel burn-up", "transitional mode operation", "safety"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.12"

+++

It is necessary to have value of sodium void reactivity effect (SVRE) around zero (no more than ~0.3%) for provide safety sodium fast reactor in ULOF type BDBA. In turn, the value of SVRE depends on the fuel burn-up – the more fuel burn-up, the greater the SVRE. The study provides the analysis of limitation fuel burn-up in the core of the big power reactor with a view to SVRE safety.

The model of the core sodium fast reactor with a big thermal power and with breeding blanket has been chosen for study. Two types of fuel have been considered – mixed oxide fuel and mixed nitride fuel.

The article considers transitional mode operation of the reactor from the start state to the steady-state overload, where core passes various stages of fuel burn-up. SVRE calculations have been carried out by two codes:
– TRIGEX – engineering code for fast reactors neutronics calculations in the diffusion approximation and three-dimensional GEX-Z geometry;
– MMKKENO – precision code for reactor characteristics calculation by Monte Carlo method. Heterogeneous description of internal structure of the fuel assemblies andcontrol rods has been applied in this code.

The results of calculations show that the value of SVRE exceeds required value twice for MOX fuel at the end of 3-rd micro campaign. For mixed nitride fuel the value of SVRE exceeds required at the end of 3-rd micro campaign also, however, this excess considerable less than for oxide fuel.

### References

1. Matveev V.I, Chebescov A.N., Cerny V.A., Krivitski I.Yu., Kirushin A.I., Belov S.B., Vasiljev B.A. Studies, development and justification of core with zero sodium-void reactivity effect of the BN-800 reactor/International Topical Meeting, Obninsk, Russia, Oct. 3-7, 1994. Proceedings Volume 1. PP.1-45–1-59.
2. Poplavskij V.M., Matveev V.I., Eliseev I.A., Kuznetsov I.A. , Volkov A.V., Semenov M. Yu., Homjakov Yu. S., Tsibulya A.M. Issledovanie vliianiia natrievogo pustotnogo effekta reaktivnosti na tekhniko-ekonomicheskie kharakteristiki i bezopasnost’ perspektivnogo natrievogo reaktora. [Investigation of the effect of the sodium void reactivity effect on the techno-economic performance and safety perspective sodium reactor]. Atomic energy, v. 108, pp. 230 – 235, Moscow, 2010 (in Russian).
3. Blyskavka A.A., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. Programmnyi kompleks CONSYST - MMKKENO dlia rascheta iadernykh reaktorov metodom Monte-Karlo v mnogogruppovom priblizhenii s indikatrisami rasseianiia v Pn- priblizhenii: Preprint FGUP «GNC RF FEI»-2887. [Program complex CONSYST - MMKKENO for nuclear reactor calculations by the Monte Carlo multigroup approximation with scattering phase in Pn-approximation: IPPE Preprint -2887]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2001 (in Russian).
4. Poplavskij V.M., Tsibulia A.M., Khomiakov Iu.S., Matveev V.I., Eliseev V.A., Cikunov A. G., Vasil’ev B.A., Belov S.B., Farakshin M.R. Aktivnaia zona i toplivnyi tsikl dlia perspektivnogo bystrogo natrievogo reaktora. [The core and the fuel cycle for future fast neutron reactors]. Atomic energy, v. 108, pp.206-211, Moscow, 2010 (in Russian).
5. Eliseev V.А., Malisheva I.V., Matveev V.I., Egorov А.V., Maslov P.А. Enhancement of the inherent self-protection of the fast sodium reactor cores with oxide fuel. // Global 2013, Salt Lake City, Utah. September 29-October 3, 2013, pp. 766-775.
6. Kochetkov A.L. Programma CARE – raschet izotopnoj kinetiki, radiacionnyh i jeko-logicheskih harakteristik jadernogo topliva pri ego obluchenii i vyderzhke: preprint FGUP «GNC RF-FEI»-2431. [Calculation of isotope kinetics, radiation and environmental characteristics of nuclear fuel during irradiation and aging: IPPE Preprint - 2431]. Obninsk, FEI Publ., 1995 (in Russian).
7. Seregin A.S., Kislicina T.S., Cibulja A.M. Annotacija kompleksa programm TRIGEX.04: preprint FGUP «GNC RF-FEI»-2846. [Annotation complex programs TRIGEX.04: IPPE Preprint -2846], Obninsk, FEI Publ., 2000 (in Russian).
8. Eliseev V.A., Zabud’ko L.M., Malysheva I.V., Matveev V.I. Nitridnoe toplivo dlja perspektivnogo bystrogo natrievogo reaktora tipa BN-1200. [Nitride fuel for future fast neutron reactor BN-1200]. Atomic energy, v. 114, Moscow, 2013 (in Russian).
9. Hammel G., Okrent D. Kojefficienty reaktivnosti v bolshih energeticheskih reaktorah na bystryh neitronah. [Reactivity Coefficients in Large Fast Power Reactors]. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975. 307 p. (in Russian).