+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:11:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="13"
file="pdf/2015/02/2015-02-article-13.pdf"
first_page="126"
last_page="131"
udc="621.039.526"
title="Sensitivity coefficients of the neutron and physical reactor parameters to the fuel inventory parameters"
original_title="Коэффициенты чувствительности Kэфф и КВ к параметрам топливной загрузки" 
authors=["DemenevaIV", "EliseevVA", "KorobeinikovaLV"]
tags=["sensitivity coefficients", "plutonium isotope composition", "multiplication factor", "breeding ratio"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.13"

+++

The required properties of the fast reactor with nitride fuel achieved only when it is loaded by fuel with strictly defined plutonium isotope composition and strictly defined enrichment. To predict isotope composition of plutonium when mixing different consignments which are stored on «Mayak» it is impossible. Therefore, nuclear fuel production shall be provided to measure which permits to balance observed deviations of the isotope composition and enrichment. This requires the algorithm based on the sensitivity coefficients [1] of physical characteristics to variations in fuel load. The article offers the method for obtaining of sensitivity coefficients to the current without carrying out physical calculations. The method is based on the substitution of conventional («vector») sensitivity coefficients on the so called «conservative» in which the plutonium isotopes maintenance variation is compensated by U-238. Numerical illustrations of sensitivity coefficients to the plutonium isotope composition and other fuel inventory parameters for the reactor BREST-300 are given.

### References

1. OrlovV.V., FilinA.I., Smirnov V.S. Bystryj reaktor estestvennoy bezopasnosti so svincovym teplonositelem dlya krupno-masshtabnoj yadernoj energetiki (Lead cooled fast reactor with natural safety for large-scale nuclear power). M., 2001 (in Russian).
2. UsachevL.N., BobkovYu.G. Teorija vozmuschenij i planirovanie experimenta v probleme yadernyh dannyh dlya reaktorov [Perturbation theory andexperiment planningin nuclear dataproblem for reactors]. Moscow, Atomizdat Publ., 1980 (in Russian).
3. Seregin A.S. Annotaciya programmy TRIGEX dlya malogruppovogo nejtronno-fizicheskogo rascheta reaktora v trehmernoj geometrii (TRIGEX summary– engineering code for fast reactors neutronics calculations in three-dimensional geometry). VANT, Ser. Fizika i tehnika yadernyh reaktorov, iss.4 (32), 1983 (in Russian).
4. Manturov G.N. et al. Sistema gruppovyh konstant BNAB-93 (Group neutron constant system BNAB-93). VANT, ser. Yadernye konstanty, iss.1, 1996 (in Russian).
5. Manturov G.N. et al. Annotaciya programmy CONSYST (CONSYST code summary). VANT, ser. Yadernye konstanty, iss.2, 1999 (in Russian).