+++

categories="article"
date="2015-09-01T01:09:53+03:00"
issue="2015-02"
issue_name="2015 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="15"
file="pdf/2015/02/2015-02-article-15.pdf"
first_page="143"
last_page="151"
udc="504.064.2.001.18"
title="Application of zonality conceptual model of chronic effects of ionizing radiation for studying the behavior of radiostrontium in terrestrial ecosystems"
original_title="Применение концептуальной модели зональности хронического действия ионизирующей радиации при изучении поведения радиостронция в сухопутных экосистемах" 
authors=["ShoshinaRR", "LavrentyevaGV", "SynzynysBI"]
tags=["Sr-90", "mollusc Bradybaena Fruticicola fruticum", "ecological zone", "the dose rate", "land cover"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.2.15"

+++

The study of the behavior of radionuclides Sr-90 in the system of «soil-plants-shell clams» on biotope regional radioactive waste storage was conducted. The purpose of the work was to examine the possibility of applying of conceptual model zonality of a chronic action of ionizing radiation in natural populations in the study of of behavior of radiostrontium in terrestrial ecosystems and in identifying radioecological zones of the biological action of a chronic exposure to ionizing radiation of the mollusc population based on of the biogeochemical regularities of technogenic migration of Sr-90 in the system «soil-plant-molluscs». The study was conducted at the experimental terrytory presented biotope of the regional radioactive waste storage. Selected samples of soil, plant material (Urtica dioica) and molluscs (snails shrub) have analyzed using the method of radiochemical separation followed by measuring the activity of the radionuclide on the scintillation spectrometer «BETA-01C». Calculation of annual doses of external beta-irradiated tissues molluscs by Sr-90 and its subsidiary radionuclide Y-90 contained in the shells, using the formula Levinger and Marinelli.

Thus, found that the dose rates of molluscs Bradybaena Fruticicola fruticum vary within 0,03-1,60 Gy/year. Based on the obtained dose rates of irradiation was performed structuring of the experimental data on the specific activity of Sr-90 in the studied system with regard of the zonality conceptual model of chronic effects of ionizing radiation, G.G.Polikarpov. In the studied area it is possible to determine the identity local sites of research in three ecological zones: a zone of physiological masking, a zone of ecological masking, a zone of explicit environmental effects. The specific activities of Sr-90 in mollusc shells regularly change in ecological zones. In connection with this in addition with the previously applied variative parameters within the conceptual model can be adapted and biogeochemical regularities and indicators of migration of Sr-90 in terrestrial ecosystems.

### References

1. Baumgertner M. V. Otsenka ekologicheskogo sostoyaniya okruzhayuschey sredyi Kemerovskoy oblasti s pomoschyu metoda lihenoindikatsii [Assessment of ecological state of the environment of Kemerovo region by the method lichenoindication] Problemy regionalnoj ekologii, 2011, no. 6, pp. 180-182 (in Russian).
2. Vasileva A.N. Kozmin G.V., Latyinova N.E. et al. Obschie zakonomernosti zagryazneniya geosistem v rayone razmescheniya regionalnogo hranilischa radioaktivnyih othodov [General regularities of pollution geosystems in the placement of the regional radioactive waste storage]. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2007, no. 2, pp. 64–74 (in Russian).
3. Vasileva A.N., Kozmin G.V., Vayzer V.I. et al. Ocenka zaschitnyh bar’erov na puti migracii radionuklidov v rajone razmescheniya hranilischa radioaktivnyih othodov [Evaluation of protective barriers to the migration of radionuclides in the area of radioactive waste disposal facility] Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 2007, no. 3, pp. 74–82 (in Russian).
4. Ganin G.N. Porogovyj effekt u bespozvonochnyh pri migracii tyazhyolyh metallov v troficheskoj cepi pochva–pedobionty [Threshold effect in invertebrates during migration of heavy metals in the food chain soil pedalion]. Vestnik DVO RAN. 2008, no. 1, рр. 98-106 (in Russian).
5. Grebennikov M.E., Hohutkin I.M. Soderzhanie tyazhyolyh metallov v nazemnyh molljuskah v rajone Sredneural’skogo medeplavil’nogo zavoda [The content of heavy metals in terrestrial molluscs in the area of Sredneuralsky copper smelter]. Materialy nauchno-prakticheskoj konferencii Ekologicheskie osnovy stabil’nogo razvitiya Prikam’ya. Perm’.
2000. р.92 (in Russian).
6. Karnauhov V.N. «O roli karotinoidov v formirovanii lipofuscina i adaptacii kletok k nedostatku kisloroda» [About the role of carotenoids in the formation of lipofuscin and adaptation of cells to oxygen deficiency]. Citologiya.1973, v. 15, no. 5, рр. 538-542 (in Russian).
7. Kuznecov A.V., Silin V.I., Pavlockaya F.I., Halikov S.K., Niyazov H.R. Metodicheskie ukazaniya po opredeleniyu soderzhaniya Sr-90 i Cs-137 v pochvah i rasteniyah [Methodical guidelines on determination of the Sr-90 and Cs-137 in soils and plants]. Moscow. 1985, р. 26 (in Russian).
8. Kutlahmedov Yu.A., Korogodin V.I., Rodina V.V., Matveeva I.V, Petrusenko V.P., Salivon A.G., Lenshina A.N. Teoriya i modeli radioemkosti v sovremennoj radioekologii [Theory and models in modern radioecology radiocapacity] V sb. matrialov Mezhdunarodnoy konferentsii «Radioekologiya: itogi, sostoyanie i perspektivyi» / Moscow. 2008, pp. 177–193 (in Russian).
9. Kutlahmedov Yu.A., Matveeva I.V., Petrusenko V.P., Salivon A.G, Rodina V.V., Len’shina A.N. Problemy ekologicheskogo normirovaniya i radiacionnaya bezopasnost’ bioty ekosistem [Problems of environmental regulation and radiation safety of biota of ecosystems]. Tehnogennaya bezopasnost’. 2009, v. 116. iss. 103, рр. 29-33 (in Russian).
10. Kutlahmedov Yu.A.,Matveeva I.V., Zaitov V.R. Modelirovanie radioekologicheskih processov metodom kamernyh modelej na primere sela v Volynskoy oblasti [Modeling of radioecological processes method of chamber models on the example village in Volyn’ region]. Visnik Natsionalnogo aviatsiynogo unIversitetu. 2005, no. 3, pp. 173–176. (in Russian)
11. Lavrentyeva G.V., Bahvalov A.V., Syinzyinyis B.I., Mullayarova R.R. Tehnologiya ocenki ekologicheskogo riska dlya suhoputnoj ekosistemy v usloviyah hronicheskogo radioaktivnogo zagryazneniya [Technology of ecological risk assessment for the terrestrial ecosystem under chronic radioactive contamination]. Problemy analiza riska. 2012, v. 9, no. 5, pp. 30–43 (in Russian).
12. Lavrentyeva G.V., Silin I.I., Synzynys B.I. Zagryaznenie geosistem radioaktivnym stronciem v rajone razmescheniya regional’nogo hranilischa radioaktivnyh othodov [Pollution of geosystems of radioactive strontium in the placement of regional radioactive waste storage]. Geoekologiya. Inzhenernaya geologiya. Gidrogeologiya. Geokriologiya. 2015, no. 1, рр. 36–46(in Russian).
13. Petuhova G.A. Mollyuski kak chuvstvitel’nye test indikatory sostoyaniya perfitona pri dejstvii antropogennogo pressa zagryaznitelej» [Molluscs as sensitive test status indicators of periphyton under the action of anthropogenic pressure pollutants]. Vestnik Tjumenskogo gosudarstvennogo universiteta. 2005, no. 5, рр. 97-100 (in Russian).
14. Polikarpov G. G. Radiacionnaya zaschita biosfery, vkljuchaya Homo Sapiens: vybor principov i poiski resheniya [Radiation protection of the biosphere, including Homo Sapiens: the choice of the principles and searches of solutions]. Morskоj ekologichеskij zhurnal. 2006, v. 5, no. 1, рр.16-34 (in Russian).
15. Polikarpov G.G., Cycugina V.G. Gidrobionty v zone vliyaniya avarii na Kyshtyme i v Chernobyle. [Hydrobionts in the zone of influence of the accident at the Kyshtym and Chernobyl. Radiation Biology. Radioecology]. Radiacionnaya biologiya. Radioekologiya. 1995, vol. 35, no. 4, рр. 536-548 (in Russian).
16. Synzynys B.I., Mirzeabasov O.A., Lavrent’eva G.V., Shoshina R.R., Momot O.A. Ocenka radiacionnogo ekologicheskogo riska i ego neopredeljonnost’ dlya biocenoza regional’nogo hranilischa radioaktivnyh othodov [Assessment of the radiative environmental risks and its uncertainty for the biocenosisof regional radioactive waste storage]. Radiaciya i risk. 2014, v. 23, no. 4, рр. 43-54 (in Russian).
17. Francevich L.I, Pan’kov I.V, Ermakov A.A, Kornjushin A.V, Zaharchuk T.N Mollyuski indikatory zagryazneniya sredy [Molluscs indicators of environmental pollution]. Ekologiya. 1995, no. 1, рр. 57-62 (in Russian).
18. Frid A.S. Modeli migracii Cu, Zn, Cd v pochvah pri oroshenii gorodskimi stochnyimi vodami [Models of of migration Cu, Zn, Cd in soils under irrigation by municipal wastewater]. Matematicheskie modeli v teoreticheskoj ekologii i zemledelii. 2014, pp. 73-76. (in Russian).
19. Hajna Dzh., Braunell G. Radiacionnaya dozimetriya [Radiation dosimetry]. Editors, Guseva N.G., Truhanova K.A. Moscow, Izdatel’stvo inostrannoj literatury Publ., 1958, р. 637 (in Russian).
20. Shoshina R. R., Lavrent’eva G. V., Geshel’ I. V., Synzynys B. I. Biogeohimicheskie pokazateli migracii tehnogennogo radionuklida Sr-90 na biotope regional’nogo hranilischa radioaktivnyh othodov [Biogeochemical indicators of migration of technogenic radionuclides Sr-90 on biotope of regional radioactive waste storage]. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring. 2014, v. 5, no. 3, рр. 223–228 (in Russian).
21. Lavrentyeva G.V. Characteristic of pollution with groundwater inflow 90Sr natural waters and terrestrial ecosystems near a radioactive waste storage. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 2014, no. 135, pp. 128-134.