+++

categories="article"
date="2022-12-14T00:24:00+03:00"
issue="2022-04"
issue_name="2022 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/04/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="18"
udc="621.039.574.5"
title="Heavy-Water Thorium-Uranium Thermal-Neutron Breeder Reactor"
original_title="Тяжеловодный уран-ториевый реактор-размножитель на тепловых нейтронах"
authors=["IsanovKA", "EgorovMYu"]
tags=["thorium uranium fuel cycle", "breeding", "thermal breeder reactor", "protactinium pit", "breeding ratio", "nuclide composition change", "fuel production"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.4.01"

+++

The problem of the natural uranium reserve depletion and further transition to a uranium thorium fuel cycle are analyzed.
Breeding options and breeder reactor versions are presented.

A concept is proposed and considered for a thorium uranium thermal neutron breeder reactor.
The thermal breeder design philosophy is described.
A neutronic calculation of an infinite fuel assembly model has been undertaken.
The FA layout has been optimized.

The effective multiplication factor and the breeding ratio, as well as the active spectrum have been determined by multigroup method. The peculiarities of the nuclide composition change, inherent in a thorium uranium fuel cycle, are considered.
The protactinium effect is discussed.

The change in the nuclide composition for a two year life (720 effective days) has been simulated.
The lifetime change in the effective multiplication factor and the breeding ratio has been determined.

Prospects for the thorium uranium breeder implementation have been formulated. A thorium uranium thermal neutron breeder and fuel breeding have been shown to be feasible.

### References

1. Uranium 2020: Resources, production and demand: Technical report (2020) Nuclear nergy Agency Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Available at:
https://oecd-nea.org/upload/docs/application/pdf/2020 (accessed Jul. 02, 2022).
2. Zverev D.L., Samoilov O.B., Romanov A.I., Panov V.A., Fal’kov A.A., Sholin E.V. & Zotov
S.A. Fuel for VVER and PWR: Current Status and Prospects. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 129,
iss. 2, pp. 51-53; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00720-z .
3. Calculation of the Isotopic Composition, Crossections and Fluxes for a Typical PWR-Cell
Loaded with (PU-Th) O 2 -Fuel, as a Function оf the Fuel Burnup. IAEA Report, 1996.
4. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Breeding of 233 U in a Thorium-Uranium Fuel Cycle in
VVER Reactors Employing Heavy Water. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty.
2013, iss. 2, pp. 12-29 (in Russian).
5. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Utilization of Non-Weapon Plutonium and High-
Enriched Uranium with 233 U Isotope Production in VVER Type Reactors Using Thorium and
Heavy Water. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty. 2014, iss. 3, pp. 42-60 (in
Russian).
6. Yurova L.N., Polyakov А.А., Rukhlo V.P., Titarenko Yu.E. & Bobrov S.A. Investigation
into the Possibilities of 233 U Accumulation in the VVER Type Reactors at Minimal
Production of 232 U. Soviet Atomic Energy. 1978, v. 45, pp. 674-678; DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1007/BF01120588 .
7. Marshalkin V.E. The Concept of Closed Thorium-Uranium-Plutonium Fuel Cycle in
Nuclear Power Industry. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty. 2018, iss. 4, pp. 5-
28 (in Russian).
8. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. The Expediency of Using Excess Amounts of Weapons-
Grade Uranium and Plutonium and Power-Grade Plutonium to Transfer Thermal Reactors
to a Closed Thorium-Uranium Fuel Cycle. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty.
2019, iss. 4, pp. 43-60 (in Russian)
9. Reda S.M., Gomaa I.M., Bashter I.I., Amin E.A. Neutronic Performance of the VVER-1000
Reactor Using Thorium Fuel with ENDF Library. Science and Technology of Nuclear
Installations. 2021, v. 4, pp. 1-9; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/8838097 .
10. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Breeding of 233 U in the Thorium-Uranium Fuel Cycle in
VVER Reactor Using Heavy Water. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, no. 11, pp. 1274-
1286; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063778815110113 .
11. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Method of Operating Nuclear Reactor in Thorium Fuel
Cycle with Production of Uranium Isotope 233 U. Izobreteniya. Poleznye Modeli. 2015, no.
5, pp. 1-20. – Pat. 2541516 RF (in Russian).
12. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Utilization of Non-Weapons-Grade Plutonium and
Highly Uranium with Breeding of the 233 U Isotope in the VVER Reactors Using Thorium and
Heavy Water. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, no. 11, pp. 1287-1300; DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1134/S1063778815110125 .
13. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Method of Operating a Nuclear Reactor in the
Uranium-Thorium Fuel Cycle with the Production of the 233 U Isotope. Izobreteniya.
Poleznye Modeli. 2017, no.14, pp. 1-20. Pat. 2619599 RF (in Russian).
14. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. On the Equilibrium Isotopic Composition of the
Thorium-Uranium-Plutonium Fuel Cycle. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2016, v. 79, no. 8, pp.
1290-1297; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063778816080135 .
15. Ponomarev-Stepnoj N.N., Lunin G.L., Ryazantsev E.P., Morozov A.G., Kuznetsov V.V.,
Kevrolev V.V. & Kuznetsov V.F. Light-Water Thorium Reactor VVER-T. Atomic Energy.
1998, v. 85, pp. 685-699; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02368690 .
16. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Natural Transmutation of Actinides by the Fission
Reaction in the Closed Thorium-Uranium-Plutonium Fuel Cycle. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i
Reaktornye Konstanty. 2016, iss. 4, pp. 64-75 (in Russian).
17. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. The Second-Generation Fissile Materials in Nuclear
Power Industry. VANT. Ser. Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty. 2017, iss. 4, pp. 54-75 (in
Russian).
18. Marshalkin V.E., Povyshev V.M. Method of Operating a Nuclear Reactor in the Thorium Fuel Cycle with the Production of the Uranium Isotope 233 U. Izobreteniya. Poleznye
Modeli. 2017, no. 31, pp. 1-20. Pat. 2634476 RF (in Russian).
19. Alvarez R. Thorium Reactors: Their Backers Overstate the Benefits. Nuclear
Information and Resource Service. 2014. Available at: https://www.nirs.org/wp-
content/uploads/factsheets/th. (accessed Jul. 02, 2022).
20. Thorium-Based Nuclear Fuel: Current Status and Perspectives. Vienna: IAEA, 1987,
164 p. (IAEA-TECDOC-412). Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/
NCLCollectionStore/ (accessed Jul. 02, 2022).
21. Abagyan L.P., Bazazyanc N.O., Nikolaev M.N., Cibulya A.M. Group Constants for the
Calculation of Reactors and Protection. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981, 232 p. (in
Russian).
22. Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. System of Group Constants BNAB-93. Part
1. Nuclear Constants for Calculation of Neutron and Photon Radiation Fields. VANT. Ser.
Yadernye i Reaktornye Konstanty. 1996, iss. 1, p. 59 (in Russian).
23. Shamanin I.V., Chertkov Yu.B., Bedenko S.V. Thorium-loaded Low-Power Reactor
Installation Operated with Super-Long Fuel Residence Time. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya
Energetika. 2016, no. 2, pp. 121-132. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.2.12
(in Russian).
24. Sylvain D., Elisabeth H., Herve N. Thorium-Uranium Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Euro Physics
News. 2007, v. 38, no. 2, pp. 24-27; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/EPN:2007007 .
