+++

categories="article"
date="2022-12-14T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2022-04"
issue_name="2022 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/04/02.pdf"
first_page="19"
last_page="27"
udc="621.039.516.25"
title="Determining the Temperature Coefficient of Reactivity of the VVR-ts Reactor in the Operating Temperature Range"
original_title="Определение температурного коэффициента реактивности реактора ВВР-ц в рабочем диапазоне температур"
authors=["KochnovOY", "PakholikDA", "NikulinEV", "KolesovVV"]
tags=["VVR ts reactor", "temperature effect of reactivity", "temperature coefficient of reactivity", "operational reactivity margin"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.4.02"

+++

The VVR ts research nuclear reactor is designed to perform a wide range of scientific
and experimental work, such as: research in the field of radiation chemistry and solid
state physics, radiation processing of materials, research in the field of radiation
materials science, neutron activation and neutron structural analysis, biomedical
research, etc.

The temperature coefficient of reactivity, which manifests itself when the moderator
(coolant) temperature changes, is one of the most important reactor neutronic
parameters. First of all, it is used in the calculation of the reactor reactivity margin.
Previously, for the VVR ts reactor, the temperature coefficient of reactivity was
determined in the course of experimental studies at the minimum controlled power level
at relatively low moderator temperatures that do not correspond to the nominal values.
This, in turn, affects the accuracy of the calculated estimate of the reactor reactivity
margin.

The purpose of this work is to study the temperature coefficient of reactivity of the
VVR ts reactor, which manifests itself when the temperature of its moderator changes
in the operating temperature range. The paper presents the methodology and description
of the experiment to determine the temperature coefficient of reactivity as well as the
results of a computational study using the MCNP program. The obtained values of the
temperature coefficient of reactivity are necessary for refining the model of the VVR
ts reactor core during neutronic calculations and confirming the safe operation of the
reactor.


### References

1. Dementiev B.A. Kinetics and Regulation of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow.
Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 272 p. (in Russian).
2. Bushuev A.V. Experimental Reactor Physics. Tutorial. Moscow. MEFI Publ., 2008, 280
p. (in Russian).
3. Kolesov V.V., Samokhin D.S., Kochnov O.Yu. Measurement of the Power Coefficient of
Reactivity of VVR-ts in a Wide Power Range. Atomic Energy. 2017, v. 122, pp. 226-229;
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0260-x .
4. Kochnov O.Yu. The Complex of Information Support of the Operator VVR+ts. Cand. Sci.
(Engineering) Diss. Obninsk. INPE Publ., 2006, 130 p. (in Russian).
5. Chusov I.A., Shelegov A.S., Kochnov O.Yu. Features of the Design of Research Reactors
of Pressurized Water Type. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2016, no. 3, pp. 116-
126; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2016.3.12 (in Russian).
6. Grigoriev E.I., Kireev A.F., Melekhin Yu.A., Yaryna V.P. Monitored Neutron Fields in the
VVR-ts Reactor for Nuclear Technology Tasks. Atomic Energy. 1990, v. 68, pp. 158-161;
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02069878 .
7. Kolesov V.V., Kochnov O.Yu., Fomin R.V. Improvement of Neutron-Physical
Characteristics of VVR-ts by Means of Replacement of a Part of Core Fuel Assembly by a
Beryllium Reflector. Atomnaya Energiya. 2015, v. 118, no. 4, pp. 191-193. Available at:
http://j-atomicenergy.ru/index.php/ae/article/view/833 (accessed Aug. 12, 2022) (in
Russian).
8. Kochnov O.Yu., Kolesov V.V., Fomin R.V., Fomichenko P.A. Possibility of Increasing the
Number of Experimental Channels in VVR-ts by Changing The Core Design. Atomic Energy.
2018, v. 125, pp. 162-164; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-018-00460-7 .
9. Kolesov V.V., Volkov Yu.V., Ukraintsev V.F., Fomin R.V. Creation of a Precision Model of
the VVR-ts Reactor for Subsequent Optimization of its Design and Development of 99 Mo
and Other Radionuclides. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2011, no. 4, pp. 129-
133. Available at: https://nuclear-power-engineering.ru/article/2011/4/17/
(accessed Aug. 12, 2022) (in Russian).
10. Judith F. Briesmeister, Ed. MCNP4B – A General Monte Carlo N+Particle Transport
code. Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA-12625-M. Manual. 1997.
11. Nakagawa Ts., Shibata K., Chiba S., Fukahori T., Nakajima Yu., Kikuchi Ya., Kawano T., 
Kanda Yu., Ohsawa T., Matsunobu H., Kawai M., Zukeran A., Watanabe T., Igarasi S., Kosako
K. & Asami T. Japanese Evaluated Nuclear Data Library Ver. 3 Rev. 2: JENDL-3.2 Journal of
Nuclear Science and Technology. 1995, v. 32, iss.12, pp. 1259-1271; DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1080/18811248.1995.9731849 .
12. NP-009-17. Rules of Nuclear Safety of Research Reactors. Moscow. FBU NTC NRS Publ.,
2017, 44 p. Available at: https://base.garant.ru/71756202/ (accessed Aug. 12, 2022)
(in Russian