+++

categories="article"
date="2022-12-14T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2022-04"
issue_name="2022 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/04/07.pdf"
first_page="78"
last_page="88"
udc="621.039.531"
title="Effects of Neutron Irradiation on the Properties of Vanadium-Iron Alloys"
original_title="Влияние нейтронного облучения на свойства сплавов ванадия с железом"
authors=["ZakharovaMI", "TarasikovVP"]
tags=["neutron irradiation", "radiation defects", "phase transformations", "vacancies", "interstitial atoms", "internal friction", "electrical resistance", "swelling", "gravity measurements", "radiation-induced segregation"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.4.07"

+++

The paper presents the results of testing samples of V+(0 – 5,0 at.% Fe) alloys irradiated with neutrons to 1,4 and 2,8 dpa at a temperature of 350 to 450°C, obtained using a set of experimental techniques: determination of density d, electrical resistivity ρ at indoor and liquid nitrogen temperatures, and internal friction at up to 600 °C .

Concentration dependences d ~ f(CFe) and ρ ~ f(CFe) have been plotted.

The neutron irradiation to 1,4 dpa at a temperature of 350 to 450°C involves breakdown of the solid interstitial solution in unalloyed V, its stabilization in alloys, breakdown of the solid substitution solution, and segregation of Fe atoms at
discharge points.

It has been shown that, unlike unalloyed vanadium, the density of alloys in the concentration range of 0,65 to 3,30 at.% of Fe increases by about 0,16 to 0,41% as a result of irradiation to 1,4 dpa.

Concentration dependences were obtained on the V+(0 – 5 at.% Fe) samples irradiated with neutrons to 2,8 dpa at temperatures of 350 to 450°C for density d: linear dependences of density d ~ f(CFe) in non-irradiated samples become power-law after irradiation (to 2,8 dpa) and are described by the expressions

dnon-ir = 6,1094 + 0,0223⋅CFe, g/cm3,

dir = 6,073 + 0,07179⋅CFe – 0,0345⋅(CFe)2 + 0,0058⋅(CFe)3, g/cm3.

Vanadium and alloys with 0,5 and 2 at.% of Fe after irradiation to 2,8 dpa swell by 0,7% at most, as the density of the V+5 at.% Fe alloy increases with irradiated at 1,25%, which is explained by the phase instability of the alloy and the possible formation of Fe atoms in the local enrichment areas.

The electrical resistivity (at 298 K and 77 K) of non-irradiated and irradiated V-Fe alloy samples, as a function of the Fe content, varies in a non-monotonic manner which is indicative of potential near ordering and/or stratification of the solid solution, this being also confirmed by internal friction data.

### References

1. Zakharova M.I., Tarasikov V.P. Investigation of Alloys of the V-Fe System by Methods of Internal Friction and Electrical Resistance. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 3, pp. 108-116; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.11 (in Russian).
2. Bykov V.N., Fedorovsky A.E. Измерение модулей упругости и внутреннего трения на малых образцах. Pribory i Tekhnika Eksperimenta. 1966, v. 1, pp. 163-167 (in Russian).
3. Zakharova M.I., Tarasikov V.P. The Effect of Neutron Irradiation on the Physical and Mechanical Properties of Refractory Metals. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 1, pp. 78-88; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.08 (in Russian).
4. Lysova G. V., Birzhevoy G. A., Khramushin N. I. Influence of Temperature on Segregation Processes in the V–5 Fe Alloy After Irradiation with V+ Ions with an Energy of 5 keV. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk. Seriya Fizicheskaya. 2002, v. 66, no. 7, pp. 1059-1060 (in Russian).
5. Zakharova M.I., Tarasikov V.P. Thermal Stability of Radiation Effects in Single-Crystal Vanadium. VANT. Ser: Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2018, iss. 4 (95), pp. 4-15 (in Russian).
6. Birzhevoy G. A., Zakharova M. I., Tarasikov V. P. Formation of Integration – Substitution Atom Complexes in Ferritic-Martensitic Steel EP-823 under Various Types of Heat Treatment. VANT. Ser: Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2019, iss. 2 (98), pp. 4-11 (in Russian).
7. Porollo S.I., Dvoryashin A.M. and Konobeev Yu.V. Radiation Damage in Neutron-Irradiated V–Fe Alloys. Physics of Metals and Metallography. 2022, v. 123, pp. 784-790; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0031918X22080075 .
8. Kornilov I.I., Glazunov V.V. Interaction of Refractory Metals of Transition Groups with Oxygen. Moscow. Nauka Pibl., 1967, 256 p. (in Russian).
9. Lang Е., Bressers J. The Effect of Oxygendoping on the Electrical Resistivity of Vanadium. Zeitschrift fur Metall–Kunde. 1975, v. 66, no. 10, pp. 619-624; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/ijmr-1975-661011 .
10. Zakharova M.I., Birzhevoy G.A., Melnichenko N.A., Pavlinchuk E.A., Sheinker I.G. Induced Activity and Radionuclide Composition of Vanadium Samples Irradiated in the BR-10 Reactor. Perspektivnye Materialy. 1999, no. 2, pp. 32-35 (in Russian).
11. Ohnuki S., Takahashi H., Shiba K., Hishinuma A., Pawel I. and Garner F. Influence of Transmutat ion on Microstructure, Density Change and Embrittlement of Vanadium and Vanadium Alloys Irradiated in HRIR. 11 Fusion Materials Semiannual Progress Report DOE /ER-0313/ 16. 1994, pp. 293-304; DOI: https://doi.org/10.2172/10167568 .
12. Borovitskaya I.V., Zakharova M.I. Internal Friction of Vanadium under Neutron Irradiation and its Alloys. Rare Metals, 2009, v. 29, spec. iss., pp. 334-337.