+++

categories="article"
date="2022-12-14T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2022-04"
issue_name="2022 - #04"
issue_id="4"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/04/09.pdf"
first_page="102"
last_page="111"
udc="621.039.5; 539.1.074.22"
title="On the Contribution of the Additional Component of the Ionization Current to the Formation of the Output Pulse of the Ionization Fission Chamber"
original_title="О вкладе дополнительной составляющей ионизационного тока в формирование выходного импульса ионизационных камер деления"
authors=["GlazyukYaV", "AlferovVP", "SalamakhaBS", "VeselovIG"]
tags=["neutron", "ionization", "fission fragment", "fission chamber", "charge in a fission chamber pulse", "neutron detection"]
rubric = "Physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.4.09"

+++

TThe article presents the results of a study of the pulse characteristics of the the fission chambers KNK15-1, KN 010 and KN 042 with different geometry of the electrode system.

The authors reveal differences in the distributions of the amplitude spectra of pulses from fission fragments for fission ionization chambers of various geometries for different directions of the electric field in the interelectrode space.

It is also shown that, for fission chambers (FC) with a plane-parallel electrode system (KNK 15-1), a change in the direction of the electric field in the interelectrode space does not lead to noticeable differences in the amplitude spectra of pulses from fission fragments, i.e., there is no dependence of the charge generated in the FC pulse on the polarity of the power supply.

Changing the direction of the electric field in the interelectrode space of the FC with the coaxial geometry of the electrode system (KN 010, KN 042) leads to differences in the amplitude spectra of pulses from fission fragments and, as a result, differences in charges in the FC pulse.

An analysis of the dependence of the distribution of the amplitude spectra of the fission chamber pulses on the direction of the electric field in the interelectrode space has made it possible for the first time to demonstrate the presence of an additional charge component in the FC pulse, which can significantly affect the neutron detection efficiency of FCs with a cylindrical electrode system. In quantitative terms, the contribution of the additional component for the studied FCs can reach 20–23%.

### References

1. Abramov A.I., Kazansky Yu.A., Matusevich E.S. Fundamentals of Experimental Methods of Nuclear Physics. Ed. 3. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1985, 488 p. (in Russian).
2. Dmitriev A.B., Malyshev E.K. Neutron Ionization Chambers for Reactor Technology. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975, 96 p. (in Russian).
3. Certificate No. 38835/3 on Approval of the Type of Measuring Instruments of the Russian Federation. Available at: https://fgis.gost.ru/fundmetrology/registry/4/items/354282 (accessed Aug. 25, 2022) (in Russian).
4. Glazyuk Ya.V., Zhitchenko M.L., Martazov E.S.. Possibility to Control the Power of the BN-800 Reactor Plant by Neutron Flux Control Equipment as Part of the ICS 52, ICS 63 Detectors and the BOSK Device. Proc. of the XXXXVI All7Russian Symposium Dedicated to the Memory of the MCST Referent N.N. Ershova. Moscow. RAS Publ., 2016, pp. 113-121 (in Russian).
5. Alferov V.P., Guryev I.P., Dmitriev A.B., Yakovlev K.I., Kirichenko G.P., Kudryavtsev A.V., Fedorov V.A. Metrological support of wide-range neutron flux control channels for CPS. Promyshlennye ASU i Kontrollery. 2006, no. 8, pp. 35-39 (in Russian).
6. Aleksakov G.N., Alferov V.P., Gruzdev S.N., Kudryavtsev A.V., Te A.G., Fedorov V.A. Hardware-Software Complex for Support of NPP Metrological Services. VANT. Ser. Fizika i Tekhnika Yadernykh Reactorov. 2005, iss. 49, part 2, pp. 42-48 (in Russian).
7. Gangrsky Yu.P., Markov B.N., Perelygin V.P. Registration and Spectrometry of Fission Fragments. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1991, 312 p.
8. Mukhin K.N. Experimental Nuclear Physics. Vol. 1. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974, 584 p. (in Russian).
9. Nasyrov F., Linev S.V. Passage of Fission Fragments U-235 through H2, D2, He, N2, Ar, Kr, Xe. Atomnaya Energiya. 1966, v. 20, pp. 536-540; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01114655 .
10. Chabod S., Fioni G., Letourneau A., Marie F. Modelling of Fission Chambers in Current Mode-Analytical Approach. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research. Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment. 2006, v. 566, no. 2, pp. 633-653; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2006.06.067; EDN KIXDVT.
11. Jammes C., Filliatre P., Geslot B., Oriol L., Berhouet F., Villard J.-F., Vermeeren L. Research Activities in Fission Chamber Modeling in Support of the Nuclear Energy Industry. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science. 2010, v. 57, no. 6, pp. 3678-3682; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/TNS.2010.2075939 .
12. Antolinez A., Rapisarda D. Fission Chambers Designer Based on Monte Carlo Techniques Working in Current Mode and Operated in Saturation Regime. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, Volume 825,2016, p 6-16; ISSN 0168-9002; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2016.03.050 .
13. Vorob’ev V.A., Obudovskii S.Yu., Kashchuk Yu.A. The Method for Determining the Charge Collection Time and the Mean Charge in the Pulse of the Ionization Fission Chamber. Izmeritel’naya Tekhnika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 60-64; DOI: https://doi.org/10.32446/0368-1025it.2019-2-60-64 (in Russian).