+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:29:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/01.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.01"
udc="621.039"
first_page="6"
last_page="17"
rubric="nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name="Nuclear power plants"
title="Evaluation of the Heat Exchange Characteristics of Cooling Tubes with External Fins for Ventilation Units of the NPP-2006 Design Containment"
original_title="Оценка теплообменных характеристик охлаждающих трубок с внешним оребрением для вентиляционных установок герметичного ограждения проекта АЭС-2006"
authors=["SolovievSL", "ShishovAV", "PovarovVP", "YaurovSV"]
tags=["NPP-2006", "ventilation", "upgrading", "containment", "operating experience", "numerical simulation", "heat exchange tubes", "finning", "cooling medium"]

+++

The paper analyses the factors that affect the cooling capacity of the ventilation units used for cooling air inside the containment of the Novovoronezh NPP II.
The heat exchange devices for air cooling represent bundles of rectilinear tubes of the same type, having fins on their outside, arranged in several rows across the ventilation duct perpendicular to the air flow.
Each heat exchanger unit consists of two heat exchangers (stages), in which the cooling medium (water) is pumped by different independent process systems.
As part of the package of activities to search for the areas for upgrading the containment ventilation system at the Novoronezh NPP II, the authors undertook a series of calculations aimed at determining the causes for the low efficiency of the heat exchange units of the NPP’s ventilation system.
The study aimed to estimate the effect of the contact between the fins and the heat exchanger tubes, estimate the effect of the cooling water temperature at the heat exchanger inlet, and estimate the effect of the cooling water flow on the cooling capacity.
Based on the results of the study, the following conclusions have been made: the existing design of the heat exchange surface of the ventilation unit cooling stages (tube and band) is equivalent to a bare tube with an improved heat exchange performance due to turbulence and mixing of the air flow using a metallic band, as well as to partial (discontinuous) thermal contact of the latter to the outer surface of the heat exchange tube.
At the same time, a variation in the cooling water flow does not have a major effect on the change in the cooling capacity of the heat exchanger.

### References

1. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasilyev B.Y., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.V., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with VVER-1000 TYPE reactor. From Physical Basics of Exploitation to Evolution Design. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010, 604 p. (in Russian).
2. Margulova T.Kh. Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook for Universities. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 1994, 288 p. (in Russian).
3. NP-036-05. Federal norms and rules in the field of the use of atomic energy. Rules for the installation and operation of ventilation systems important for safety. FBU «NTC YARB», 2005, 14 p. (in Russian).
4. Tikhomirov K.V., Sergeenko E.S. Heat engineering, heat and gas supply and ventilation. Textbook for universities, 4th ed. Moscow. Stroyizdat Publ., 1991, 480 p. (in Russian).
5. Bogoslovsky V.N., Kokorin O.Ya., Petrov L.V. Air conditioning and refrigeration. Textbook for universities. Stroyizdat Publ., 1985, 367 p. (in Russian).
6. Kokorin O.Ya. Air conditioning installations. Fundamentals of calculation and design. Textbook for universities, 2nd ed., Mechanical Engineering Publ., 1978, 264 p. (in Russian).
7. Slonimsky I.B. Installation of ventilation and air conditioning systems of thermal power plants and nuclear power plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 133 p. (in Russian).
8. Samarsky A.A., Gulin A.V. Numerical methods. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1989, 432 p. (in Russian).
9. Denisikhina D.M. The use of the STAR-CCM+ program in the design of ventilation systems. St. Petersburg. SPbGASU Publ, 2013, 68 p. (in Russian).
10. Bystrov Yu.A., Isaev S.A., Kudryavtsev N.A., Leontiev A.I. Numerical modeling of vortex intensification of heat transfer in pipe packages. St. Petersburg. Shipbuilding Publ., 2005, 392 p. (in Russian).
11. Patankar S. Numerical methods for solving problems of heat transfer and fluid dynamics. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 124 p. (in Russian).
12. Peire R., Taylor T. D. Computational methods in problems of mechanics. St. Petersbug. Hydrometeoizdat Publ., 1986, 351 p. (in Russian).
13. Fletcher K. Computational methods in fluid dynamics. Vol. II. Moscow. Mir Publ., 1991, 552 p. (in Russian).
14. Kirillov P.L., Yuryev Y.S., Bobkov V.P. Handbook of thermohydraulic calculations. (nuclear reactors, heat exchangers, steam generators). Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 296 p. (in Russian).
15. Lapin Yu.V., Strelets M.H. Internal flows of gas mixtures. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1989, 366 p. (in Russian).
16. Chui E. H., Raithby G. D. Computation of Radiant Heat Transfer on a Non-Orthogonal Mesh Using the Finite-Volume Method. Numerical Heat Transfer, Part B, 1993, no. 23, pp. 269–288.
17. Ferziger J. H., Peric M. Computational method for fluid dynamics. Berlin. Heidelberg Publ., 1999, 389 p.
