+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:27:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/03.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.03"
udc="621.039.52"
first_page="32"
last_page="43"
rubric="thermalphysics"
rubric_name="Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
title="Impact of the Parametric Effect on the Transient Stability in Modern Designs of Ship Reactor Plants"
original_title="Влияние параметрического эффекта на устойчивость переходных процессов в современных проектах судовых реакторных установок"
authors=["KresovDG"]
tags=["kinetics", "phase lag", "instability", "thermal-hydraulic inertia"]

+++

The new generation of ship and small nuclear power plant reactors for a wide range of applications, along with increased safety requirements, combines high specified endurance characteristics.
Under certain conditions, design transients can be accompanied by prolonged alternating deviations of the reactor plant parameters from specified values, which is indicative of insufficient parametric margins to the stability boundary.
One of the provoking factors of the additional thermal and baric cycling caused by this to the reactor plant equipment is the connection of the remote pressure compensation system to the hot sections of the primary circuit.
The addition of relatively cold coolant into the main circulation circuit at the pressure reduction stage increases the amplitude of the negative in-pile temperature fluctuation half-wave.

To accumulate the physical ideas of such a parametric effect, the paper considers two simplified reactor models, which differ greatly in terms of the pressure compensator connection point.
The results of analyzing linearized models make it possible to conclude theoretically on the system stability area reduction as the result of coolants being mixed directly at the core outlet and, conversely, on the damping of overshoots in the event of coolants mixed at the core inlet.
At the same time, the analysis has revealed a number of additional factors that affect considerably the resistance boundary. 
These include reactivity factors for coolant temperature and pressure, and a significant absolute value of the axial offset.

The presented calculations of one of the transients based on a nonlinear model, which confirm the obtained theoretical conclusions, illustrate the amplitudes of perturbations in some of the reactor plant parameters for different layout options, obtained from the data of draft studies for one of the designs.

The study has identified the factors that contribute to the stabilization of the reactor feedback system under self-control conditions.

### References

1. Petrunin V.V. Reactor plants for low-power nuclear power plants. Vestnik Rossiyskoy Akademii Nauk. 2021, v. 91, no. 6, pp. 528 – 540. DOI: https://doi.org/10.31857/S0869587321050182 (in Russian).
2. Kresov D.G., Kulikov A.V., Olenskaya E.V. Enhanced Life Assurance for Ship Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 127, pp. 8 – 13. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00576-4
3. Zverev D.L., Fadeev Yu.P., Pakhomov A.N., Galitskikh V.Yu., Polunichev V.I, Veshnyakov K.B., Kabin S.V., Turusov A.Yu. Reactor installations for nuclear icebreakers: Origination experience and current status. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 129, pp. 18 – 26. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00706-x
4. Petrunin V.V., Fadeev Yu.P., Pakhomov A.N., Veshnyakov K.B., Polunichev V.I, Shamanin I.E. Conceptual Design of Small NPP with RITM-200 Reactor. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 125, pp. 365 – 369. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00495-4
5. David L. Hetrick. Dynamics of nuclear reactors. Moscow, Atomizdat, 1975, 400 p. (in Russian).
6. Rabinovich M.I., Trubeckov D.I. Introduction to the theory of oscillations and waves: A textbook. Moscow, Nauka Publ., 1984, 432 p. (in Russian).
7. Mitenkov F.M., Motorov B.I. Mechanisms of unstable processes in thermal and nuclear power. Moscow, Energoizdat., 1981, 88 p. (in Russian).
8. Mitenkov F.M., Motorov B.I. Non-stationary modes of marine nuclear steam generating plants. Leningrad, Sudostroenie Publ., 1970, 200 p. (in Russian).
9. Galanin A.D. Introduction to the theory of nuclear reactors on thermal neutrons. Moscow, Energoatomizdat, 1984, 416 p. (in Russian).
10. Klochkov O.B., Kulikov A.V., Davidov А.V., Kresov D.G. Engineering program ECKM-3D for calculation of non-stationary modes of NSSS with HSSE with gas (removed) or steam-gas (integrated) pressure compensation system during forced and natural circulation of coolant. (ECKM-3D Program). Application 2011614058 Russian Federation; applicant and copyright holder JSC «Afrikantov OKBM» (RU); certificate of state registration of the computer program no. 2011615838; stated 02.06.11, registered 27.07.11 (in Russian).
11. Kresov D. G. On Conditions of Development of Neutronic Mechanisms of Instability on a Portion of Groups of Emitters of Delayed Neutrons. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2023, vol. 86, no. 8, pp. 1782 – 1784. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063778823080094
