+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:25:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/05.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.05"
udc="621.039-78"
first_page="59"
last_page="67"
rubric="materials"
rubric_name="Nuclear materials"
title="Investigation of High Density Polyethylene Properties in Ionizing Radiation Shielding Materials"
original_title="Исследование свойств вторичного полиэтилена высокой плотности в материалах защиты от ионизирующего излучения"
authors=["BalachkovMM", "MelnikovaAS", "SmykovskayaVO", "YurchenkoMD"]
tags=["nuclear power", "radiation technologies", "radiation protection", "plastic recycling", "shielding material", "gamma ray attenuation coefficient"]

+++

Nowadays, radiation technologies are used in many areas of industry and science.
The use of radiation technologies is associated with dose loads on personnel, and there is a need therefore
for developing and switching to new, more effective and promising protective materials.
One of the most promising materials is polyethylene.
On the one hand, this material is widely known in the industry and has been studied quite well; on the other hand, there are many studies showing the prospects of developing protective materials based on polyethylene.
This paper proposes to use plastic from recycled materials for protective purposes.

In the course of the experiments carried out to obtain samples of recycled plastic processed by fragmentation and further heating to 200°C for about half an hour.
Preprocessed plastic wa 
exposed to pressure using a hydraulic laboratory press.
The density of the obtained samples varied in a range of 0.887 ± 0.007 to 0.909 ± 0.007 g/cm3.
It was found in the experiments to study the attenuation of gamma radiation using samples that the values of the mass attenuation coefficients of gamma quanta were 0.1703 ± 0.0011, 0.180 ± 0.024, 0.121 ± 0.016, 0.03 ± 0.05 cm2/g,
respectively, for energies of 59, 122, 344, and 1409 keV.
For gamma radiation with energies of 122, 344 and 1409 keV, the mass attenuation coefficients coincide with the reference values within the error.
For the energy of 59 keV, the difference between the values of the attenuation coefficients and the tabulated data was determined and the experimental design was continued to be revised.

### References

1. Kaçal M.R., Akman F., Sayyed M.I. Evaluation of gamma-ray and neutron attenuation properties of some polymers. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2019, v. 51. no. 3, pp. 818 – 824. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2018.11.011
2. Bartolomey G.G., Bat G.A., Baibakov V.D., Altukhov M.S. Fundamentals of the Theory and Methods of Calculation of Nuclear Power Reactors: A Textbook. 3rd ed., revised and enlarged. Ekaterinburg. Yuland Publ., 2016, 512 p. ISBN 5-283-03804-2 (in Russian).
3. GOST 16338-85 Low-Pressure Polyethylene. Specifications: Interstate Standard. Effective date: 01.01.1987 (in Russian).
4. Hubbell J.H., Seltzer S.M. X-Ray Mass Attenuation Coefficients: NIST Standard Reference Database 126. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA, 2004. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.18434/T4D01F
5. Klinkov A.S., Belyayev P.S., Skuratov V.K., Sokolov M.V., Odnolko V.G. Disposal and Recycling of Containers and Packages of Polymer Materials: A Textbook. Tambov. Tambov State Tech. University Publ., 2010, 100 p. ISBN 978-5-8265-0903-6 (in Russian).
6. More C.V., Alsayed Z., Badawi M.S., Thabet A.A., Pawar P.P. Polymeric composite materials for radiation shielding: A review. Environmental Chemistry Letters. 2021, v. 19. pp. 2057 – 2090. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-021-01189-9
7. Mahmoud M.E. El-Sharkawy R.M., Allam E.A. Elsaman R. El-Taher A. Fabrication and characterization of phosphotungstic acid-copper oxide nanoparticles-plastic waste nanocomposites for enhanced radiation-
shielding. Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 2019, v. 803, pp. 768 – 777. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2019.06.290
8. Keshavarzi M., Malekie S., Hosseini M.A. An Overview of the Radiation-protective Properties of Nanocomposites Containing Iron Oxide and High Density Polyethylene in the Presence of X-and Gamma-rays. 14th International Seminar on Polymer Science and Technology. Tarbiat Modares University Tehran, Iran, 2020.
9. Website of Canberra-Packard Trading Corporation LLC, 2006. URL: http://www.canberra.ru/html/ products/Gamma_Low/detectors/NAI.htm (accessed date May 05, 2022) (in Russian).
