+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:24:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/06.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.06"
udc="621.039.4"
first_page="68"
last_page="80"
rubric_name="Nuclear materials"
title="High-temperature ampoule tests of hafnium hydride"
original_title="Высокотемпературные ампульные испытания гидрида гафния"
authors=["PoluninKK","BazyukSS","GuseynovSV","Kuzma-KichtaYA","MelnikovGN","RisovanyyVD"]
tags=["high-temperature tests", "dehydrogenation", "hafnium hydride", "absorbing material", "fast neutron reactor", "control rod"]

+++

The paper presents the results of high-temperature ampoule tests for advanced absorbing materials based on hafnium hydride (HfH<sub>x</sub>).
An installation and a methodology have been developed for the ampoule testing.
The ampoule test installation consists of two vertical furnaces coaxially connected to each other.
A low-temperature furnace is used for the ampoule preheating and exposure between cycles, and a high-temperature furnace is used for isothermal exposure to the temperature specified by the test program.
Samples of δ- and ε-phase hafnium hydride were prepared, and an up to 5μm thick oxide coating was applied to some of the δ-HfH<sub>x</sub> samples.
Experimental data were obtained on the thermal stability of hafnium hydride in an inert gas environment (argon, helium) at temperatures of up to 900°C.
A comparison was made between the resistance of hafnium hydride obtained by direct (through) saturation and sintering of powder in conditions of cyclic thermal loading.
Based on the results of the HfH<sub>x</sub> testing in a closed inert environment, it was noted that high-temperature exposure of the δ-HfH<sup>1,6</sup> pellets (to temperatures of up to 900°C) does not lead to the hydride dissociation, while ε-HfH<sup>1,9</sup> in an inert environment remains stable at up to 650°C, and there is hydrogen release taking place as a temperature of 800°C is reached, which leads to an increase in the ampoule pressure and to the ampoule depressurization.
The experiment was numerically simulated by the finite element method using the ANSYS Mechanical 16.0 code, and the hafnium hydride heating rate and time to the specified test temperature were determined.

### References

1. Risovanyy V.D., Zakharov A.V., Klochkov E.P., Guseva T.M. Boron in nuclear technology. Ed. 2. Dimitrovgrad, SSC RIAR JSC Publ., 2011, 668 p. ISBN 5-9483-016-7 (in Russian).
2. Waltar A.E., Reynolds A.B. Fast Breeder Reactors. New York: Pergamon Press, 1981, 853 p. ISBN 0-08-025983-9.
3. Risovanyy V.D., Zakharov A.V., Klochkov E.P. Absorbing materials and regulatory bodies of nuclear reactors. Moscow, MPEI Publ., 2012, 392 p. ISBN 978-5-383-00662-7 (in Russian).
4. Kuwae R., Obata M., Sato K., Shima S. Development of Zircaloy Clad Hafnium Rods for BWR Long Life Neutron Absorbers. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 1986, 23 (2), pp. 185 – 187. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/18811248.1986.9734968
5. Horn R.M., Frew B.D., Van Diemen P. Thermal Spectrum Control Rod Materials. Comprehensive Nuclear Materials. 2012, v. 3, pp. 485-507. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-056033-5.00077-X.
6. Joyce M. Mainstream Power Reactor Systems. Nuclear Engineering: A Conceptual Introduction to Nuclear Power. 2018, pp. 227 – 261. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100962-8.00010-X
7. RisovanyV.D., Klochkov E.P., Ponomarenko V.B. Hafnium in nuclear engineering. La Grange Park, Ill. American Nuclear Society, 2001, 101 p. ISBN 978-0894485664.
8. Iwasaki T., Konashi K. Development of Hydride Absorber for Fast Reactor – Application of Hafnium Hydride to Control Rod of Large Fast Reactor. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2009, v. 46, no. 8, pp. 874 – 882. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2007.9711595.
9. Ikeda K., Moriwaki H., Ohkubo Y., Iwasaki T., Konashi K. Application of hafnium hydride control rod to large sodium cooled fast breeder reactor. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2014, v. 278, pp. 97 – 107. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2014.07.002
10. Konashi K., Itoh K., Yokoyama T., Yamawaki M. Utilization Research and Development of Hydride Materials in Fast Reactors. Advances in Science and Technology. 2014, v. 94, pp. 23 – 31. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AST.94.23
11. Dolukhanyan S.K., Alexanian A.G., Hakobian A.G. Interaction of Hafnium with Hydrogen and Nitrogen in the Combustion Regime. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy. 1995, v. 20, no. 5, pp. 391 – 395.
12. Hirai M. Sakurai H., Yuda R., Ouchi A., Konashi K. Study on an innovative fast reactor utilizing hydride neutron absorber – Fabrication and high temperature behavior of hafnium hydride pellets. Proceedings of the 2010 International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants – ICAPP’10. 2010.
13. Konashi K., Yamawaki M. Utilization of Hydride Materials in Nuclear Reactors. Advances in Science and Technology. 2010, v. 73, pp. 51 – 58. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AST.73.51
14. Polunin K.K. Mokrushin A.A., BraginS.Yu., D.S. Kiselev, Kuzma-KichtaYu.A. Protective Coating of Irradiation Device for Fast-Neutron Reactor. Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 2020, 1683, 032040, 7 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1683/3/032042
15. Petukhov B.S., Genin L.G., Kovalev S.A., Solovyov S.L. Heat exchange in nuclear power plants. Ed. 3. Moscow, MPEI Publ., 2003, 548 p. ISBN 5-7046-0843-4 (in Russian).
16. Polunin K.K. Bespechalov B.N., Zaitsev D.A., Kiselev D.S., Kuzma-KichtaYu.A., Urusov A.A., Chuvikov S.V. Hafnium hydride: study of thermophysical and mechanical properties. Novoe v rossijskoj elektroenergetike. 2023, no. 1, pp. 6 – 16 (in Russian).
17. Chirkin V.S. Thermophysical properties of nuclear engineering materials: reference book. Moscow, Atomizdat, 1968, 484 p. (in Russian).
