+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/07.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.07"
udc="621.039.58"
first_page="81"
last_page="94"
rubric="coolants"
rubric_name="Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
title="On Application of the Thermal and Nuclear Power Experience to Select Water Chemistry for the VVER-SKD Innovative Reactor Plant. Part 2"
original_title="О применении опыта тепловой и атомной энергетики для выбора водно-химического режима инновационной реакторной установки ВВЭР-СКД. Часть 2"
authors=["YurchevskyEB", "SemishkinVP", "ChusovIA", "BezrukovYA", "KavunOY", "SharyiNV"]
tags=["high-temperature deferrization filter", "desalination", "direct-flow", "steam turbine", "nanostructured membranes", "electromagnetic filter", "deferrization", "water chemistry"]

+++

The second part of the study is devoted to the solution of several interrelated problems that define, in the long run, the serviceability of the VVER-SKD reactor plant and a number of auxiliary systems.
It has been shown that, since corrosion and erosion were one of the key problems in the process of introducing fossil-fueled ACS steam turbine units, it is necessary to conduct additional bench and reactor tests of advanced steels.
An analysis into the experience of operating the existing high-temperature purification systems at VVER-1000 and BN-600 power units gives ground to expect that installation of a high-temperature deferrization filter upstream of the VVER-SKD reactor will reduce the deposition of activated corrosion products on the heat transfer surfaces between the reactor and the turbine condenser, and, accordingly, the intensity of radiation effects on operating and maintenance personnel, and relieve ion-exchange filters of corrosion products and the radionuclides they have absorbed when the power unit operating mode changes.
It has been shown that the developed technology for liquid media purification using filtering elements with nanostructured membranes has not been adequately justified and experimentally confirmed.
The paper shows that ion-exchange or membrane technologies should be used to demineralize make-up water.
The key conclusions to be made from the study are as follows: a neutral correction-free water chemistry is recommended for operation in the nominal mode of the VVER-SKD based innovative power unit’s main circuit; in order to reduce the risk of the iron oxide deposit formation on the reactor’s heat transfer surfaces and prevent the turbine flow area choking, it is reasonable to use full-flow high-temperature deferrization of feedwater; a possibility needs to be provided in the process of designing and building a VVER-SKD prototype for analyzing the efficiency of using deferrization electromagnetic filters in the neutral water
chemistry conditions and with the design coolant parameters.

### References

1. Yurchevsky Е.B., Semishkin V.P., Kuznetsov V.М., Chusov I.А., Kavun О.Yu., Sharyi N.V. On Application of Thermal and Nuclear Power Engineering Experience for Selection of Water-Chemical Regime of the Innovative Reactor Plant VVER-SKD. Part 1. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2023, no. 3, pp. 57 – 72. DOI: https://doi.org/ 10.26583/npe.2023.3.05 (in Russian).
2. Yurchevskiy E.B., Churkin A.N., Semishkin V.P., Chusov I.A., Shary N.V., Kavun O.Yu. Water-chemical regime of VVER-SCD and main systems of its maintenance. Problems of Atomic Science and Engineering. Series: Physics of Nuclear Reactors, 2023, issue 3, pp. 64 – 75 (in Russian).
3. Morozova I.K. Gromova A.I., Gerasimov V.V., Kucheryaev V.A., Demidova V.V. Removal and Deposition of Corrosion Products of Reactor Materials. Moscow, Atomizdat, 1975, 280 p. (in Russian).
4. Luzanova L.M., Zadonsky N.V., Shvoev A.F., Piskun A.S., Zubkov O. S., Teplova G. N. Activated corrosion products in the primary circuit (Circulation-Loop) of a VVER-1000 reactor. Atomic Energy, 1990, vol. 68, iss. 1, pp. 68 – 72. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02069727
5. Gusev B.A., Semenov V.G., Efimov A.A., Panchuk V.V. Behavior of corrosion products in the primary circuit of nuclear power plants with water coolant. Vestnik of St. Petersburg State University, 2012, ser. 4, iss. 4, pp. 110 – 118 (in Russian).
6. Gerasimov V.V. Corrosion of reactor materials. Moscow, 1980, 256 p. (in Russian).
7. Dub A.V., Risovanyi V.D. Development of New Materials and Tasks of Reactor Materials Science. Scientific session «Science for Nuclear Power Engineering». Obninsk, 2019, 26 p. (in Russian).
8. Tyapkov V.F., Sharafutdinov R.B. Status, main problems and directions for improving the water-chemical regime of nuclear power plants. Water treatment (Vodoochistka), 2006, no. 11, pp. 33 – 41 (in Russian).
9. Bragin V.B., Korostelev D.P., Murakov Yu.B., Neshkov P.F., Orlov A.K., Prokhorov N.A., Tret’yakov S.Ya., Famintsyn A.M., Tsekh A.R., Sharygin L.M. Commercial testing of a unit for high-temperature removal of corrosion products from water coolant. Atomic energy, 1989, vol. 67, iss.1, pp. 515 – 522. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01126391
10. Gusev B.A., Moskvin L.N. High-gradient magnetic filters for water coolant purification from corrosion products. NPS Life Cycle Assurance Technologies, 2019, no 4, pp. 66 – 80 (in Russian).
11. Grigorov В.V. Purification of liquid media from undissolved radioactive impurities by means of filtering elements with nanostructured membranes. Cand. Diss. (Engineering), Мoscow, 2018 (in Russian).
12. Tsyrulnikov D.L., Yurchevsky E.B., Belan F.I. Test results of the electromagnetic filter on the second circuit of NPP with VVER-440. Thermal Engineering, 1987, no. 4, pp. 34–37 (in Russian).
13. Yurchevskiy E.B., Shary N.V., Pervov A.G., Pichugina M.A. Ion-exchange and reverse osmosis technology of water desalination for TPP and NPP. Heavy Engineering, 2015, no. 7 – 8, pp. 19–22 (in Russian).
14. Larin B.M., Larin A.B., Kolegov A.V. Measurement of electrical conductivity and pH in TPP water regime monitoring systems. Ivanovo, IHEU Publ., 2014, 332 p. (in Russian).
15. Petukhov B.S., Genin L.G., Kovalev S.A. Heat exchange in nuclear power installations. Moscow, Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986, 472 p. (in Russian).
