+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/08.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.08"
udc="614.876:621.039.586"
first_page="95"
last_page="108"
rubric="environmentalaspects"
rubric_name="Environmental aspects of nuclear power"
title="Targeted Remediation Strategies for Rural Settlements in the Southwest of the Bryansk Region in the Remote Period after the Chernobyl Accident"
original_title="Стратегии адресной реабилитации сельских населенных пунктов юго-запада Брянской области в отдаленный период после аварии на Чернобыльской АЭС"
authors=["PanovAV", "MikailovaRA", "KrechetnikovVV"]
tags=["Chernobyl accident", "radioactive contamination", "137Cs", "southwestern districts of Bryansk region", "population", "radiation doses", "remediation technologies", "radiation safety"]

+++

The paper outlines a targeted remediation system for 71 rural settlements in five southwestern districts of the Bryansk region affected by the Chernobyl accident.
Remediation strategies have been developed through a comprehensive assessment of the current radiation and demographic situation.
This analysis also considered the economical use of the territory and the optimization of applying 7 remediation technologies, using computer geoinformation decision-making support systems ReSCA and GISDSS.
Two approaches to restoring rural settlements are presented, considering the costs of implementing remediation technologies and their acceptability to the public.
The assessment was conducted locally for each settlement with a population exposed to a dose of more than 1 mSv/year, as well as globally, encompassing five districts and the region as a whole.
The calculation determined that the costs of implementing remediation technologies to reduce public exposure were estimated to be in the range of 1.23 – 1.33 billion roubles.
The estimated averted collective dose from the implementing developed strategies was found to be between 79 – 88 man-Sv, with an average cost of 15.1 – 15.6 million roubles per man-Sv.
It has been observed that over the last 15–20 years, the cost of restoring settlements has increased by 4.7 times, while the potential savings in residents’ collective dose have decreased by 35%.
Agricultural technologies aimed at reducing the internal exposure dose of residents keep the maximum effectiveness in decreasing public doses.
These technologies include surface improvement of pastures and the use of ferrocene-containing medicines for cows.
10 rural settlements and technologies have been identified as having the greatest impact in reducing the cost of averted dose for the public.

### References

1. Balonov M.I., Golikov V.Yu., Parkhomenko V.I., Ponomarev A.V. Decontamination of localities in the Bryansk region after the Chernobyl accident. Radiation Hygiene. 2014, no. 7 (1), pp. 5 – 15 (in Russian).
2. Belous N.M., Podolyak A.G., Karpenko A.F., Smol’skiy E.V. Efficiency of protective measures at rehabilitation of the fodder grounds of Russia and Belarus polluted after accident on the Chernobyl NPP. Radiation Biology. Radioecology. 2016, no. 56 (4), pp. 405 – 413 (in Russian).
3. Panov A.V., Fesenko S.V., Aleksakhin R.M. Effectiveness of measures aimed at reducing radiation doses to residents of rural settlements in the remote period after the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant. Radiation Biology. Radioecology. 2001, no. 41 (6), pp. 682 – 694 (In Russian).
4. Bruk G.Y., Romanovich I.K., Bazyukin A.B., Bratilova A.A., Vlasov A.Yu., Gromov A.V., Zhesko T.V., Kaduka M.V., Kravtsova O.S., Saprykin K.A., Stepanov V.S., Titov N.V., Yakovlev V.A. The average annual effective doses for the population of the settlements of the Russian Federation attributed to zones of radioactive contamination due to the Chernobyl accident (for the zonation purposes). Radiatsionnaya Gygiena. 2017, no. 10 (4), pp. 73 – 78; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2017-10-4-73-78 (In Russian).
5. Panov A.V., Fesenko S.V., Alexakhin R.M., Pasternak A.D., Prudnikov P.V., Sanzharova N.I., Goryainov V.A., Novikov A.A., Muzalevskaya A.A. The radioecological situation in the agricultural sphere in the contaminated regions of Russia during the long term after the Chernobyl accident. Radiation Biology. Radioecology. 2007, no. 47 (4), pp. 423 – 434 (In Russian).
6. Romanovich I.K., Bazyukin A.B., Barkovsk A.N., Biblin A.M., Bratilova A.A., Bruk G.Ya., Varfolomeev K.V., Gromov A.V., Drozdova E.A., Zhesko T.V., Ivanov S.A., Kaduka M.V., Kormanovskaya T.A., Kravtsova O.S., Nekrasov V.A., Ramzaev V.P., Saprykin K.A., Titov N.V., Isakov O.A., Zlotnikova E.I., Sosnitskiy A.G., Filin V.I., Kudryashov A.V., Ladik A.A., Lalayan V.A. Results of modern radiation-hygienic surveys of settlements of Bryansk Oblast of the Russian Federation bordering the Republic of Belarus. Part 1: Characteristics of the settlements. Radiation Hygiene. 2023, no. 16 (3), pp. 22 – 36; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2023-16-3-22-36 (In Russian).
7. Romanovich I.K., Bazyukin A.B., Bratilova A.A., Bruk G.Ya., Varfolomeeva K.V., Drozdova E.A., Zhesko T.V., Kaduka M.V., Kormanovskaya T.A., Kravtsova O.S., Kudryashov A.V., Ladik A.A., Lalayan V.A. Results of modern radiation-hygienic surveys of settlements of Bryansk Oblast of the Russian Federation bordering the Republic of Belarus. Part 2: Population’s food preferences (diet). Radiation Hygiene. 2023, no. 16 (4), pp. 7 – 21; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2023-16-4-7-21 (In Russian).
8. Travnikova I.G., Bruk G.Y., Shutov V.N., Bazjukin A.B. Contribution of different foodstuffs tо the internal exposure of the rural inhabitants of the Bryansk region in Russia after the Chernobyl accident. Radiation Hygiene. 2013, no. 6 (2), pp. 11 – 20 (In Russian).
9. Bratilova A.A., Bruk G.Y. Influence of the consumption of different foodstuffs on the internal exposure dose formation in the adult population of the Russian Federation after the accident at the Chernobyl NPP. Radiation Hygiene. 2018, no. 11 (2), pp. 53 – 59; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2018-11-2-53-59 (In Russian).
10. Varfolomeeva K.V., Zelentsova S.A., Repin V.S. Consumption structure of forest mushrooms by residents of contaminated districts of the Bryansk region in the remote period after the Chernobyl accident. Radiation Hygiene. 2023, no. 16 (4), pp. 55 – 63; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2023-16-4-55-63(In Russian).
11. Panov A.V., Komarova L.N., Lyapunova E.R., Mel’nikova A.A. Peculiarities of the exposure dose formation on the population in the most affected regions of Russia after the Chernobyl NPP accident. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2023, no. 3, pp. 74 – 84; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.3.06 (in Russian).
12. Ramzaev V.P., Barkovsky A.N. Assessment of secondary radioactive contamination of a decontaminated land plot located on the territory of a recreation base in a wooded area. Radiation Hygiene, 2023, no. 16 (2), pp. 52 – 64; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2023-16-2-52-64 (In Russian).
13. Belous N.M., Prudnikov P.V., Shcheglov A.M., Smolskiy E.V., Belous I.N., Silayev A.L. Estimating risk of radiocesium presence at levels exceeded the permissible amount of the radionuclide in forage and milk from the south-west part of Bryansk region long after the Chernobyl accident. Radiation and Risk. 2019, no. 28 (3), pp. 36 – 46; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2019-28-3-36-46 (in Russian).
14. Marchenko T.A., Radin A.I., Razdaivodin A.N. Estimating of ambient dose equivalent rate in forest sites in the south-west of the Bryansk region. Radiation and Risk. 2023, no. 32 (4), pp. 67 – 78; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2023-32-4-67-78 (in Russian).
15. Panov A.V. Returning radioactively contaminated territories to normal life: current problems and ways for solution (35 years after the Chernobyl NPP accident). Medico-Biological and Socio-Psychological Issues of Safety in Emergency Situations. 2021, no. 1, pp. 5 – 13; DOI: https://doi.org/10.25016/2541-7487-2021-0-1-05-13 (in Russian).
16. Fesenko S., Jacob P., Ulanovsky A., Chupov A., Bogdevich I., Sanzharova N., Kashparov V., Panov A., Zhuchenka Yu. Justification of remediation strategies in the long term after the Chernobyl accident. J. Environ. Radioact. 2013, no. 119, pp. 39-47; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2010.08.012.
17. Belous N.M., Smol’skij E.V., Chesalin S.F., Shapovalov V.F. Role of mineral potassium in decrease in receipt 137Cs in fodder herbs and increase in their productivity on it is radioactive the polluted grounds. Agricultural Biology. 2016, no. 51(4), pp. 543 – 552; DOI: https://doi.org/10.15389/agrobiology.2016.4.543rus (in Russian).
18. Titov I.E., Krechetnikov V.V., Mikailova R.A., Panov A.V. Geoinformation decision support system for remediation of the 137Cs contaminated agricultural lands after the Chernobyl NPP accident. Nucl. Eng. Technol. 2022, no. 54(6), pp. 2244 – 2252; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2021.12.017.
19. Kuznetsov V.K., Isamov N.N., Panov A.V. Assessment of grasslands remediation effectiveness in different periods after the Chernobyl accidents. Radiation and Risk. 2021. no. 30(2), pp. 50 – 61; https://doi.org/10.21870/0131-3878-2021-30-2-50-61 (in Russian).
