+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/09.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.09"
udc="621.039.51"
first_page="109"
last_page="124"
rubric="modeling"
rubric_name="Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
title="Comparison of the Calculation Accuracy of the Neutronics Characteristics of a Heavy Liquid Metal Cooled Fast Reactor Model Using the Various Evaluated Neutron Data Libraries"
original_title="Сопоставление точностей расчета нейтронно-физических характеристик модели быстрого реактора с тяжелым жидкометаллическим теплоносителем с использованием различных нейтронных данных"
authors=["AndrianovAA", "AndrianovaON", "KuptsovIS", "UvarovaAA"]
tags=["evaluated neutron data", "uncertainties", "covariance matrices", "fast neutron reactor", "sensitivity coefficient", "uncertainty", "data assimilation"]

+++

The paper analyses the neutron data and covariance matrixes, which are crucial for the calculation prediction of the neutronics characteristics of fast neutron reactors with uranium-plutonium fuel and currently available in the state-of-the-art versions of evaluated nuclear data libraries: ENDF/B-VIII, JENDL-5, TENDL 2021, JEFF 4T1.
The newly obtained covariance data are compared to the data that was presented in the Russian evaluated nuclear data library BROND 3.1.
A simplified model of a fast neutron reactor with mixed dense nitride uranium-plutonium fuel and a heavy liquid metal coolant was applied to calculate the spread of neutronics characteristic values and their uncertainties due to neutron data using various evaluated nuclear data libraries for the following characteristics: effective multiplication factor, effective delayed neutron fraction.
Doppler reactivity coefficient, breeding ratio and gain, reactivity margin for fuel burnup and other fuel burnup characteristics.
It has been observed that, on the whole, the uncertainties of the reactor functionals have decreased when estimated using state-of-the-art versions of the evaluated neutron data libraries, compared to previous releases of those libraries. 
The article also examines the changes in target accuracies for predicting the main neutronics characteristics of fast neutron reactors over the past decades, as well as evaluates the requirements for neutron data uncertainties to achieve the recently declared target accuracies.
The main findings of this study are presented in two aspects: firstly, in terms of the effects evaluated neutron data from different libraries have on the accuracy of calculations for the primary neutronics characteristics of fast reactors; and secondly, in terms of the potential for improving the accuracy of predicted neutronics characteristics of fast reactors by considering the results of reactor physics measurements.

### References

1. Official website of Evaluated Nuclear Data File (ENDF). Available at: https://www-nds.iaea.org/exfor/endf.htm (accessed Dec. 31, 2023).
2. Official website of WPEC subgroup 46 «Efficient and effective use of integral experiments for nuclear data validation». Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/download/wpec/sg46/ (accessed Dec. 31, 2023).
3. Cabellos O., Hursin M., Palmiotti P. WPEC/SG46 Exercise on Target Accuracy Requirement. In EPJ Web of Conf., EDP Sciences, 2023, V. 284, p. 4.
4. Castelluccio D. M., Grasso G., Lodi F., Peluso V. Assessment of nuclear data target accuracy requirements for ALFRED. In Proc. of the Inter. Conf. on Phys. of Reactors 2022 (PHYSOR 2022), Pittsburgh, PA. May 15 – 20 2022, pp. 1085 – 1094.
5. Manokhin V.N., Usachev L.N. Nuclear data requirements for fast reactors. Atomic Energy. 1984, vol. 57, iss. 4, p. 683 – 692. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01123637
6. Database for ICSBEP (DICE). NEA/OECD Web-site. Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/dice/webstart/dice.jnlp (accessed Dec. 31, 2023).
7. International Reactor Physics Handbook Database and Analysis Tool (IDAT). Web-site NEA/OECD. Available at: https://www.oecd-nea.org/idat/webstart/IDAT.jnlp (accessed Dec. 31, 2023).
8. Andrianov A.A., Andrianova O.N., Korovin Yu.A., Kuptsov I.S., Spiridonova A.A. A computer code for optimizing the neutronic model parameters based on results of integral experiments. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2023, no. 2, pp. 148 – 161. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.2.12 (in Russian).
9. Bychkov S.A., Varfolomeeva V.A., Grushin N.A., Ivanov I.E., Andrianova O.N. Nuclide kinetics problems solution using MNT-CUDA. Neutron-physical problems of atomic energy: Abstracts of the scientific and technical conference, p. 79., May 28-31. Obninsk, 2024 (in Russian).
10. Balovnev A.V., Davydov V.K., Zhirnov A.P., Moiseev A.V., Soldatov E.O. Modeling the top-feeding cycle of a lead-cooled fast reactor. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2021, no. 4, pp. 66 – 75. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.4.06 (in Russian)
11. Andrianov A.A., Kuptsov I.S., Osipova T.A., Spiridonova A.A., Andrianova O.N., Utyanskaya T.V. Nuclear energy system modelling application package: functional overview and examples. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2022, no. 2, pp. 148 – 160. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.14 (in Russian).
12. Andrianov A.A., Andrianova O.N., Golovko Y.E., Kuptsov I.S., Lomakov G.B., Spiridonova A.A. Testing modern evaluations of neutron data accuracy in the problem of determining the accuracy of calculations of neutron-physical characteristics of a fast reactor model with a heavy liquid metal coolant. Manuscript deposited at VINITI, Deposition № 14-V2023 24.05.2023. DOI: 10.36535/0202-6120-2023-02-14-2023 (in Russian).
13. Andrianova O.N., Golovko Yu. E., Zherdev G.M., Zadornov D.V., Koscheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Peregudov A.A., Tsibulya A.M. Testing covariance matrices of uncertainties in the BNAB data system. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 2, pp. 109 – 117; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.2.12 (in Russian).
14. Usachev L.N., Bobkov Yu.G. Perturbation theory and experiment planning in the problem of nuclear data for reactors, Atomizdat, Moscow, 1980, p. 88 (in Russian).
15. Uncertainty and target accuracy assessment for innovative systems using recent covariance data evaluations. A Report by the Working Party on International Evaluation Co-operation of the Nuclear Science Committee, 2008.
