+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/11.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.11"
udc="614.876"
first_page="141"
last_page="152"
rubric="modeling"
rubric_name="Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
title="Computer Simulation of Transport and Accumulation of Tritium and Carbon-14 in Technological Systems of Pressurized Water Reactors"
original_title="Компьютерное моделирование переноса и накопления трития и углерода-14 в технологических системах водо-водяных энергетических реакторов"
authors=["BolotovAA", "BarchukovVG", "GaluzinAS", "SurinPP", "KochetkovOA", "EreminaNA"]
tags=["radiation safety", "simulation model", "tritium", "carbon-14", "tritium/radiocarbon propagation", "water exchange", "classes", "computer program"]

+++

The paper presents approaches to the development of a computing modulesoftwarein accordance with the simulation model of accumulation and distribution of tritium and carbon-14 in technological systems of pressurized water reactors (PWR), on the basis of which the methodology «Assessment of accumulation and distribution of H-3 and C-14 in technological systems of nuclear power plants» has been developed.
The software algorithm has been built such that to reproduce the model described in the methodology accurately.
The designations of the monitored parameters in the software were adopted as close as possible to the original methodology.
Monitoring of parameter state is implemented by instances of special classes (basic element of object-oriented programming) that allow describing any calculated parameters based on three information classes, the program instances of which form a hierarchical structure.
This made it possible to take advantage of the approaches and capabilities of object-oriented programming by allocating special methods for accessing parameters, as well as using parameter names and indexes to ensure their interaction and output the necessary information.
In total, the software uses more than 400 parameters.
The software structure makes it possible to simulate the propagation of tritium and carbon-14 in PWR technological systems by using a special task text file.
The result of the calculation is two reports: the main (short) and technical (full).

### References

1. Grachev V.A, Sazonov A.B., Bystrova O.S., Zadonskaya Y.N., Zadonsky N.V. Formation and distribution of tritium in the primary circuit of VVER: numerical simulation. Izvestiya vuzov. Fizika. 2021, v. 64, no. 2-2, pp. 20 – 26. DOI: https://doi.org/10.17223/00213411/64/2-2/20 (in Russian).
2. Belikov V.V., Goloviznin V.M., Katishkov Y.V., Semenov V.N., Starodubceva L.P., Sorokovikova O.C., Fokin A.L. Nostradamus – a computer system for predicting the radiation situation. Verification of the model of atmospheric transport of impurities. Proc. of IBRAE. 2008., no. 9, pp. 41 – 102 (in Russian).
3. Arkadov G.V., Kroshilin A.E., Parshikov I.A., Solov’ev S.L., Shishov A.V., Zhukavin A.P. The Virtual Digital Nuclear Power Plant: a Modern Tool for Supporting the Lifecycle of VVER-based Nuclear Power Units. Thermal Engineering. 2014, v. 61, no. 10, pp. 697 – 705. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601514100012
4. Zadonsky N.V., Sazonov A.B., Grachev V.A. Certificate of state registration of the computer program RU 2021667835. Formation, distribution and accumulation of tritium in technological media (RU); Copyright holder: Federal State Budgetary Institution National Research Center «Kurchatov Institute». No. 2021667241; application 10/28/2021; published 03.11.2021, 1 p. (in Russian).
5. Kochetkov O.A., Anpilogova I.N., Barchukov V.G., Kovyazin V.L., Maximov A.Y., Surin P.P. Simulation model as a possibility of describing the process of transfer and accumulation of nuclides. Nuclear and radiation safety journal. 2022, no. 3(105), pp. 15 – 27. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26277/SECNRS.2022.105.3.002 (in Russian).
6. Ekidin A.A., Vasilyev A.V., Murashova E.L., Kuryndin A.V. Estimation of tritium entry into the atmosphere from the spray pools of the Balakovo NPP during the cold period. Nuclear and radiation safety journal. 2014, no. 3(85), pp. 35 – 45 (in Russian).
7. Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of 08.07.2015 No. 1316-r «On approval of the list of pollutants subject to state regulation measures in the field of environmental protection», 30 p. (in Russian).
8. The IAEA database on discharges of radionuclides to the atmosphere and the aquatic environment (DIRATA). Available at: https://dirata.iaea.org (accessed Apr 19, 2023).
9. Barchukov V.G., Kochetkov O.A., Klochkov V.N., Eremina N.A., Maksimov A.A. Distribution of tritium and its compounds in the environment under normal conditions of operating of Kalininskaya nuclear power plant. Russian Journal of Occupational Health and Industrial Ecology. 2021, 61(9), pp. 594 – 600. DOI: https://doi.org/10.31089/1026-9428-2021-61-9-594-600 (in Russian.)
10. Barchukov V.G., Kochetkov O.A., Fomin G.V., Kabanov D.I., Ivanov E.A. Distribution of tritium and its compounds by air under normal operating conditions of the Balakovo NPP. ANRI, 2016, no. 1 (84), pp. 49 – 54. Available at: https://anry.pro/article/210 (accessed Apr 19, 2023) (in Russian).
11. Vasyanovich M.E., Ekidin A.A., Vasilyev A.V., Kryshev A.I., Sazykina T.G., Kosykh I.V., Kapustin I.A. Determination of radionuclide composition of the Russian NPPs atmospheric releases and dose assessment to population. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 2019, v. 208 – 209, p.106006. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvrad.2019.106006.
12. Kryshev A.I., Vasyanovich M.E., Ekidin A.A., Filatov Yu.N., Murashova E.L. Tritium entry into the atmosphere with emissions from NPP-VVER and population irradiation dose assessment. Atomic Energy. 2020, vol. 128, no. 6, pp. 362 – 367. DOI : https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00703-0
13. Radioecological situation in the regions where enterprises of the State Atomic Energy Corporation Rosatom are located (edited by I.I. Linge and I.I. Kryshev). Moscow, 2021, 555 p. (in Russian).
14. Sanitary rules and regulations. Basic sanitary rules for ensuring radiation safety (with Amendment 1). OSPORB-99/2010: approved. Decree of the Chief State Sanitary Doctor of the Russian Federation dated April 26, 2010, no. 40, 100 p. (in Russian).
15. Postanovlenie Pravitel’stva RF ot 19.10.2012 no. 1069 «O kriteriyah otneseniya tverdyh, zhidkih I gazoobraznyh othodov k radioaktivnym othodam, kriteriyah otneseniya radioaktivnyh othodov k osobym radioaktivnym othodam i k udalyaemym radioaktivnym othodam I kriteriyah klassifikacii udalyaemyh radioaktivnyh othodov» (red. 04.02.2015 no. 95) (in Russian).
16. Rublevsky V.P., Yacenko V.N., Chanyshev E.G. The role of carbon-14 in human technogenic exposure (edit. O.A. Kochetkov). Moscow, IzdAT, 2004. 197 p. ISBN 5-86656-160-3 (in Russian).
17. Barchukov V.G., Kochetkov O.A., Klochkov V.N., Eremina N.A., Surin P.P., Maximov A.A., Kabanov D.I., Velichko V.K., Bogdanenko N.A., Alsagaev Zh.I. Distribution of carbon-14 in the environment under normal operating conditions of the Kursk NPP. Мedical Radiology and Radiation Safety. 2023, v. 68, no. 1, pp. 25 – 33. DOI: https://doi.org/10.33266/1024-6177-2023-68-1-25-33 (in Russian).
18. O vvedenii v deistvie metodiki MT 1.1.4.02.1617-2019 «Otsenka nakopleniya I rasprostraneniya tritiya I radiougleroda v tekhnologicheskikh skhemakh atomnykh stantsii». Order of JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom» General Director Petrov A.Yu. No. 9/01/381-P, 10.03.2021 «On the introduction of the MT 1.1.4.02.1617-2019», 2021 (in Russian).
19. Vasilyev A.N. Java. Object-oriented programming. Basic Course in Object-Oriented Programming. Moscow -St. Petersburg-Kiev, 2000, 719 p. (in Russian).
20. Gurikov S.R. Programming in the Lazarus environment. 2023. ISBN 978-5-00091-555-4 (in Russian).
21. Kopylov A.Z., Lychagin Yu.V., Osipov V.I. Embarcadero RAD Studio 10.3 Rio Software Development Environment Tutorial. St. Petersburg: BSTU «Voenmekh» im. D.F. Ustinova, 2019. 27 p. (in Russian).
