+++

categories="article"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
date="2024-09-20T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2024-03"
issue_name="2024 - #03"
issue_id="3"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/03/13.pdf"
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.3.13"
udc="57.043"
first_page="166"
last_page="174"
rubric="applicationofnucleartech"
rubric_name="Application of nuclear tech"
title="Study of the Effect of Gamma Irradiation on the Morphological And Genetic Parameters of Barley"
original_title="Исследование влияния гамма-облучения на морфологические и генетические показатели ячменя обыкновенного"
authors=["AfoninaSO", "AtamanovskayaGA", "KomarovaLN"]
tags=["food security", "radiation stimulation", "seeds", "barley", "gamma irradiation", "shoot length", "root length", "mitotic index", "aberrant cell frequency"]

+++

One of the priority areas for the development of the Russian Federation is food security and sustainable development of the entire agro-industrial complex of our country.
One of the ways to increase the economic efficiency of growing crops is pre-sowing irradiation of seeds.
The purpose of this agricultural technique is to accelerate the growth and development of plants, shorten the growing season and increase yield.
However, due to the instability of the stimulating effect in field and laboratory conditions, the technology of pre-sowing seed irradiation has not become widespread.
In this regard, research is required to analyze the mechanisms of stimulation and justify the use of pre-sowing seed irradiation technology.

The present study identified the stimulating effect of gamma irradiation on the length of the shoot and main root of common barley at doses of 15 and 20 Gy.
It has been demonstrated that gamma irradiation of barley seeds at doses of 2, 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25 Gy does not lead to a change in the mitotic index; irradiation at a dose of 50 Gy reduces the mitotic index by 2.5 times.
A dose-dependent increase in the frequency of aberrant cells in the root meristem of germinated seeds after gamma irradiation was shown, with the exception of a gamma irradiation dose of 2 Gy.
The transcriptional activity of the gene encoding the PM19L membrane protein in common barley embryos increased after gamma irradiation at doses of 15, 20, 25 and 50 Gy.

### References

1. Lazarevich N.V., Sergeyeva I.I., Lazarevich S.S. Radiobiology: course of lectures: 4 parts. Part 2. Radiobiology of plants. Gorki. Belarusian State Agricultural Academy Publ., 2011, 84 p. (in Russian).
2. Volkova P.Yu., Bondarenko E.V., Kazakova E.A. Radiation hormesis in plants. Current Opinion in Toxicology. 2022, v. 30. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cotox.2022.02.007
3. Churyukin R.S., Geras’kin S.A. Effects of barley seed irradiation (60Co) on the plant development. Radiatsiya i risk. 2013, v. 22, no. 3, pp. 80 − 92 (in Russian).
4. Geras’kin S.A. Plant adaptation to ionizing radiation: Mechanisms and patterns. The Science of the total environment. 2024, v. 916. DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.170201
5. Poznyak Ye.I. Source material for the selection of malting barley. Zemlyadeliye i selektsiya v Belarusi. 2011, no. 47, pp. 240 − 247 (in Russian).
6. Babayan R.S. Germination of seeds in rolls of filter paper and polyethylene film. Sel’skokhozyaystvennaya biologiya. 1981, no. 3, pp. 473 − 475 (in Russian).
7. Pausheva Z.P. Workshop on plant cytology. Moskow. Agropromizdat Publ., 1988, 271 p. (in Russian).
8. Kazakova Ye.A., Makarenko Ye.S., Podlutskiy M.S. Radiosensitivity of varieties of winter and bright barley according to the severity of the morphological effect of low-dose gamma irradiation of original seeds. Zernovoye khozyaystvo Rossii. 2020, no. 2, pp. 23 − 28 DOI: https://doi.org/10.31367/2079-8725-2020-68-2-23-28 (in Russian).
9. Volkova P.Yu. Modifications in the gene expression profile in the embryos of gamma-irradiated barley seeds. Biotechnology in crop production, livestock production and agricultural microbiology. Moscow, FGB-NU, Apr. 15-16, 2019, pp. 34 − 35 (in Russian).
10. Volkova P.Yu., Churyukin R.S., Kazakova E.A. Analysis of mitotic activity in the root meristem of seedlings of gamma irradiated barley seedlings. Aktualnyye voprosy selskokhozyaystvennoy radiobiologii: Trudy FGBNU VNIIRAE. Obninsk, FGBNU VNIIRAE. 2019, v. 2, pp. 98 − 100 (in Russian).
11. Bitarishvili S.V., Volkova P.YU., Geras’kin S.A. Effects of the barley seed gamma irradiationon the content of phytohormones in the dynamics of germination. Fiziologiya rasteniy. 2018, v. 65, no. 3, pp.223 − 232 (in Russian).
12. Dikarev V.G., Geras’kin S.A., Dikarev A.V., Dikareva N.S. Comparative analysis of the efficiency of using barley intercalary and apical meristems for bioindication of the genotoxic effect of lead. Ekologicheskaya genetika. 2018, v.16, no. 3, pp. 37 − 46 (in Russian).
13. Meng J. Analysis and Functional Verification of PlPM19L Gene Associated with Drought-Resistance in Paeonialactiflora Pall. International journal of molecular sciences. 2022, v. 23. DOI: 10.3390/ijms232415695
14. Bitarishvili S.V. Expression of phytohormone metabolism genes in barley seeds after γ-irradiation. Modern issues of radiation genetics, Dubna, June 27-28, 2019. Dubna, OIYAI Publ., 2019, pp. 25 − 27 (in Russian).
