+++

categories="article"
date="2024-03-18T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2024-01"
issue_name="2024 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/01/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="17"
udc="621.039.5"
title="System Features of Fast Sodium Reactors in a Two-Component Structure of Nuclear Power Generating"
original_title="Системные возможности быстрых натриевых реакторов в двухкомпонентной  ядерной энергетике"
authors=["TroyanovVM", "GulevichAV", "GurskayaОS", "DekusarVM", "EliseevVA", "KorobeynikovVV", "MoseevAL"]
tags=["two-component nuclear power system", "spent nuclear fuel", "NFC closure", "technical and economic assessment", "additional opportunities", "specific present value of electricity production"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.1.01"

+++

The phased transfer of Russia’s nuclear power industry to a two-component nuclear power system with thermal and fast reactors in a single closed NFC allows solving a number of deferred system problems of modern energy, such as accumulation of spent fuel from thermal reactors and spent fuel returned from foreign NPPs built according to Russian designs; inefficient use of the uranium raw material base; recycling of minor actinides and other long-lived high-level waste accumulated from the activities of thermal reactors. 

The article examines the fundamental possibilities of two-component NPS, which appear due to the availability of commercial fast neutron sodium reactors. Due to the synergistic development of thermal and fast reactors, it is expected to achieve an economic effect associated with the emergence of new fuel services in the nuclear power plant system, such as the production and improvement of the isotopic composition of plutonium for thermal reactors, transmutation of «external» minor actinides, production of isotopes for various purposes, production of hydrogen, etc. The expansion of Russia’s export opportunities is also being considered, both in terms of fuel supply for units built using Russian technologies and foreign units with MOX fuel. In this approach, it is important to analyze the technical and economic indicators not of individual reactors, but of the economy of the whole system, where fast reactors perform the necessary system functions due to their inherent excess of neutrons. The article makes a preliminary technical and economic assessment of such system functions provided by fast sodium reactors. It is shown that fast and thermal reactors working together in a two-component nuclear energy system, with the same electrical power and similar technical and economic indicators, can significantly reduce the necessary infrastructure costs and/or generate additional income, thereby reducing the specific levelized cost of electricity production. 

### References

1. Alekseev P.N., Gagarinsky A.Yu., Kalugin M.A., Kukharkin N.E., Semchenkov Yu.M., Sidorenko V.A., Subbotin S.A., Teplov P.S., Fomichenko P.A., Asmolov V.G. On a Strategy for the Development of Nuclear Power in Russia. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 126, iss. 4, pp. 207 – 212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00538-w
2. The White Paper of Nuclear Energy. Closed-loop NFC with fast reactors. Under the general editorship of E.O. Adamov. M.: Publishing house of JSC NIKIET, 2020, 496 p. (in Russian).
3. Alekseev P.N., Alekseev S.V., Andrianova E.A., Asmolov V.G., Dekusar V.M., Zrodnikov A.V., Kagramanyan V.S., Koltun O.V., Pavlov A.S., Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N., Subbotin S.A., Temishev R.R., Teplov P.S., Usanov V.I., Tsibulskii V.F. Two-component Nuclear Energy System with Thermal and Fast Reactors in a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle. Ed. by N.N. Ponomarev-Stepnoy. М.: Tehnosfera, 2016, 160 p. Available at: https://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/dvuhkomponentnaya-yadernaya-systema_2016(accessed Dec.15, 2023) (in Russian).
4. Zrodnikov A.V., Korobeynikov V.V., Moseev A.L., Egorov A.F., Dekusar V.M. Multi-criteria analysis of the efficiency of the scenarios for the development of nuclear power engineering in Russia under conditions of uncertainty of knowledge about the future. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 3, pp. 5 – 16. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.3.01 (in Russian).
5. Alekseev P.N., Balanin A.L., Dekusar V.M., Egorov A.F., Klinov D.A., Korobeynikov V.V., Marova E.V., Maslov A.M., Nevinitsa V.A., Staroverov A.I., Fomichenko P.A., Shepelev S.F., Shirokov A.V. Development of BN-1200 physical and technical design solutions AIMED at improvement of SFR technology competitiveness. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno-reaktornyye konstanty. 2018, iss. 2, pp. 71 – 83. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/images/pdf/2018/2-8.pdf (accessed Dec.15, 2023) (in Russian).
6. Alekseev P.N., Balanin A.L., Gulevich A.V., Dekusar V.M., Egorov A.F., Klinov D.A., Korobeynikov V.V., Marova E.V., Maslov A.M., Moseev A.L., Nevinitsa V.A., Teplov P.S., Troyanov V.M., Fomichenko P.A., Shepelev S.F. Signature of a Two Component Nuclear Energy System on the basis of VVER and BN reactors. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno-reaktornyye konstanty. 2022, iss. 4, pp. 59 – 74. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/images/pdf/2022/issue2022-4-59-74.pdf (accessed Dec.15, 2023) (in Russian).
7. Camarcat N., Garzenne C., Mer J., Leroyer H., Desroches E., Delbecq J.-M. Industrial research for transmutation scenarios. Comptes Rendus Mecanique. 2011, v. 339, iss. 4, pp. 209 – 218. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crme.2011.01.006 .
8. Klinov D.A., Gulevich A.V., Eliseev V.A., Bur’evskii I.V., Gurskaya O.S., Troyanov V.M., Meriot C., Lemasson D., Velardo H., Camarcat N. Fast Reactor Aided Adjustment of Plutonium Isotope Composition. Atomic energy. 2020, v. 129, iss. 5, pp. 270 – 277. DOI: https://doi.org/s10512-021-00747-2 .
9. Eliseev V.A., Klinov D.A., Camarcat N., Lemasson D., Meriot C., Pershukov V.A., Troyanov V.M., Velardo H. On the possibility to improve mixed uranium-plutonium fuel in fast reactors. Nuclear Energy and Technology. 2020, v. 6, no. 2, pp. 131 – 135. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3897/nucet.6.51587 .
10. Poplavsky V.M., Tsibulya A.M., Khomyakov Y.S., Matveev V.I., Eliseev V.A., Tsikunov A.G., Vasil’ev B.A., Belov S.B., Farakshin M.R. Core and fuel cycle for an advanced sodium-cooled fast reactor. Atomic energy. 2010, v. 108, iss. 4, pp. 260–266. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-010-9287-y .
11. Tuzov A.A., Troyanov V.M., Gulevich A.V., Gurskaya O.S., Dekusar V.M., Moseev A.L., Simonenko V.A. The Initial Stage of Closing the NFC of the Russian Two-Component Nuclear Power Engineering System. Atomic energy. 2022, v. 133, iss. 2, pp. 72–78. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-023-00975-8 .
12. Gulevich A.V., Eliseev V.A., Klinov D.A., Korobeinikova L.V., Kryachko M.V., Pershukov V.A., Troyanov V.M. Possibility of Burning Americium in Fast Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 128, iss. 2, pp. 88 – 94. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00656-w .
13. Dekusar V.M., Zrodnikov A.V., Eliseev V.A., Moseev A.L. On the issue of accumulation and reactor utilization of americium in nuclear energy. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno-reaktornyye konstanty. 2019, no. 1, pp. 215 – 223. DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2019-1-215-223 (in Russian).
14. Zalimskaya M. Report of the Head of Tenex JSC at the Symposium of the World Nuclear Association, London, September 21, 2017. Available at: http://www.world-nuclear-news.org/UF-Russia-proposes-new-closed-fuel-cycle-2309177.html (accessed Dec.15, 2023).
15. Tuzov A.A., Gulevich A.V., Gurskaya O.S., Dekusar V.M., Eliseev V.A., Zarapina E.M., Troyanov V.M. Features of Americium transmutation in Fast Reactor of the Type BN-1200M. Atomnaya energiya. 2023, v.134, no. 5 – 6, pp. 230–238. Available at: https://j-atomicenergy.ru/index.php/ae/ issue/view/420 (accessed Dec.25, 2023) (in Russian).
16. Dekusar V.M., Dolgov E.V., Ilyunin V.G., Kalashnikov A.G., Pivovarov V.A., Troyanov M.F., Chizhikova Z.N., Sharapov V.N. Ways and Possibilities of Thorium Cycle Application for Light Water and Fast Reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya energetika. 1999, no 1, pp. 25 – 31. Available at: https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/journals/1999/01.pdf (accessed Dec.15, 2023) (in Russian).
17. The development of hydrogen energy as a new page of energy strategy. Available at: https://www.eprussia.ru/market-and-analytics/2762164.htm?sphrase_id=5580295 (accessed Dec.15, 2023).
18. Golovko V.F., Dmitrieva I.V., Ryazanov A.V. Configuring Nuclear Power Source based on HTGR for technological use. Proceedings of the R.E. Alekseev NSTU. 2022, no 2, pp. 44 – 57. DOI: https://doi.org/10.46960/1816-210X_2022_2_44 (in Russian).
19. Sorokin A.P., Alekseev V.V., Ivanov A.P., Kuzina Yu.A. Studies of high-temperature energy technology with a fast neutron reactor for hydrogen production. M: LLC AP Stolitsa, 2022, 258 p. ISBN-978-5-6048556-7-6 (in Russian).
20. Poplavskii V.M., Zabud’ko A.N., Petrov É.E., Ovcharenko M.K., Popov V.V., Bogush V.B., Loginov N.I., Tarasov V.A., Polevoi V.B., Horomskii V.A., Mikheev A.S. Physical characteristics and problems of developing a sodium-cooled fast reactor as a source of high-potential thermal energy for hydrogen production and other high-temperature technologies. Atomic energy. 2009, v. 106, no 3, pp. 162 – 167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-009-9147-9