+++

categories="article"
date="2024-03-18T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2024-01"
issue_name="2024 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/01/04.pdf"
first_page="42"
last_page="58"
udc="621.039.548"
title="Diagnostic Information System for Analysis of Data on Fuel Failures Aimed  at Enhancing Fuel Reliability"
original_title="Информационная система для обобщения данных по отказам ТВС с целью повышения эксплуатационной надежности топлива"
authors=["EvdokimovIA", "KalinichevPM", "KhromovAG", "AfanasievaEYu", "MaslovaLA", "SorokinAA", "GoryushinIO", "BurtsevAYu", "ZolotarevSP", "BabkinSV"]
tags=["NPP", "WWER", "nuclear fuel", "fuel failure", "leaking fuel", "fuel reliability", "failure statistics"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.1.04"

+++

Fuel failures lead to significant financial losses during operation of a nuclear power plant (NPP). The most common fuel failures are due to a fuel assembly (FA) containing one or more leaking fuel rods. In order to reduce the concomitant losses, the most countries with advanced nuclear industry launched projects for approaching to «zero failure level». Some countries developed software codes for monitoring and analysis of data related to fuel failures at NPPs.

For assessing the main factors influencing failures of WWER-1000/1200 fuel, the analytical (diagnostic) information system was developed. The system is a web-based interactive software code that provides mathematical processing of accumulated data using, among others, statistical methods.

As a base for assessment of data on fuel failures, the developed system provides a wide range of tools for analysis of fuel reliability indicators. Along with common reliability indicators, additional ones are considered that allow assessing of the predominant failure mechanisms. The analysis of the reliability indicators is aimed at detection of deviations from expected normal fuel behavior. The key component of the system is an interactive toolkit designed for defining causes of the detected deviations. The system provides automatic selection of data related to each group of failures including design documentation, data on FA fabrication, reports on validation of the fuel cycle, reports on detection of leaking fuel, data of post-irradiation examinations and so on. The result is that the user obtains the full set of data for formulation and verification of hypotheses on the main factors that could have led to deviations in the failure rate. Analysis of data on fuel failures supported by the developed system can be used by fuel vendors and nuclear utilities for elaboration of measures aimed at enhancing the fuel reliability.

### References

1. Molchanov V.V. Project «Zero Failure Level»: Organization, State, Tasks. 11th Int. conf. «WWER fuel performance, modelling and experimental support». Bulgaria, Varna, September 26 – October 03, 2015.
2. Molchanov V.V. Project «Zero Failure Level»: current problems, events, prospects. Intern. Meet. of TVEL JSC «Experience of operation of Russian-made nuclear fuel at nuclear power plants with VVER-1000». Nessebar, Bulgaria, 26 – 30 September 2016 (in Russian).
3. Mečíř V. Zero Level Fuel Defect Project: Effectivity. XIIth Intern. Conf. on WWER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support. Nessebar, Bulgaria, 18 – 22 September, 2017.
4. Shestakov Yu.M., Semenovykh A.S. Problems and perspectives of moving toward zero fuel failures and mitigation of fuel failure consequences at NPPs with WWER reactors in Russia. 11th Int. conf. «WWER fuel performance, modelling and experimental support». Bulgaria, Varna, September 26 – October 03, 2015.
5. Edsinger K., Cheng B., Daum R., Deshon J., Hussey D., Kucuk A., Mader E.V., Pytel M., Peitmeyer M.,Yagnik S.K., Yueh K. Zero by 2010 and recent U.S. fuel reliability experience. Proc. Water Reactor Fuel Performance Meeting (TopFuel). Chengdu, China, Sept.11–14, 2011, paper T2 – 41.
6. Deshon J., Whiteside K. Establishing and Sustaining a Technical Program to Achieve Zero Fuel Failures, (EPRI, INPO). IAEA Tech. Meet. «Achieving Zero Fuel Failure Rates: Challenges and Perspectives». Nessebar, Bulgaria, 1 – 2 October, 2015.
7. Mazurkiewicz S., Bretting C., Petit C., Borum G., Friend B., Ziabletsev D., Zoladz B. Meeting the Industry Challenge to Achieve Leak Free Performance, (AREVA). LWR Fuel Performance Meet. (Top Fuel 2016). Boise, Idaho, USA, 11–16 September 2016, pp.1405 – 1414.
8. Faulkner C., Arimescu I., Mazurkiewicz S., Schneider R., O’Cain M. Fuel failures recent experience and their mitigation: a US perspective. Tech. Meet. Fuel Failures in Normal Operation of Water Reactors: Experience, Causes and Mitigation. IAEA, 14–18 December 2020. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE-2004web.pdf (accessed 01 Sep. 2023)
9. Alvarez L., Daniels T., Dangoulème D., Doria F., Edsinger K., Fujiwara, S., Inozemtsev V., Ip M., Kamimura K., Killeen J., Kucuk A., Lewis B., Novikov V., Onufriev V., Pageau, F., Prasad P. N., Reid P., Sun A., Suk E., Tayal M., Tran T. Review of fuel failures in water cooled reactors. International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2010, pp. 13 – 17. (IAEA nuclear energy series, ISSN 1995-7807; no. NF-T-2.1). Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1445_web.pdf (accessed date Sept. 01, 2023).
10. Alonso P.J.M., Armstrong J., Bertsch J., Bragg-Sitton S.M., Chan, P.K., Choithramani Becerra S., Chrapciak V., Druenne H., Evdokimov I., Kucuk A., Lewis B., Meyogan T., Novikov V., Onufriev V., Rossiter G., Shams M.Y., Sokolov N., Veshchunov M. Review of fuel failures in water cooled reactors (2006-2015): an update of IAEA Nuclear Energy Series no. NF-T-2.1. Vienna. 2019, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series, no. NF-T-2.5, pp. 2 – 28. (IAEA). Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/PUB1864_web.pdf (accessed 01 Sep. 2023).
11. Na A., Zhibin S. Inspection and repair of damaged fuel assembly. Technical Meeting on Fuel Failure in Normal Operation of Water Reactors: Experience, Causes and Mitigation. IAEA, Vienna, 14 – 18 December 2020. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE-2004web.pdf (accessed date Sept. 01, 2023).
12. Corbett S. Recent Experience and Related Developments in Post Irradiation Examinations at Canadian Nuclear Laboratories to Support Defect Root Cause Examinations for Canadian PHWR Utilities. Technical Meeting on Fuel Failure in Normal Operation of Water Reactors: Experience, Causes and Mitigation, IAEA, Vienna, 14 – 18 December 2020. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/TE-2004web.pdf (accessed 01 Sep. 2023).
13. Strozhuk A.V., Zvir E.A., Zhitelev A.V., Bokov A.A., Volkova I.N. The results of the study of leaky fuel rods VVER-1000, conducted in JSC «SSC NIIAR» in the period 2016 – 2017. 11th ISTC «Safety, efficiency and economics of nuclear energy». Moscow, Rosenergoatom Concern JSC, May 23–24, 2018 (in Russian).
14. Volkova I.N., Goryachev A.V., Zvir E.A., Zhitelev V.A., Nikitin O.N., Strozhuk A.V. Results of the study of the structure of the oxide film in areas of increased oxidation of fuel element shells of TVS-2M spent at the 4th power unit of the Balakovo NPP during one TC. 11th ISTC «Safety, efficiency and economics of nuclear energy». Moscow, Rosenergoatom Concern JSC, May 23 – 24, 2018 (in Russian).
15. Zvir E.A., Zhitelev V.A., Zakharov A.V., Kryukov F.N., Shishin V.Yu. The main results of post-reactor studies performed at JSC «SSC NIIAR» in 2014 – 2018. 11th conf. on reactor materials science. SSC NIIAR, May 28 – 30, 2019, Dimitrovgrad. Available at: https://www.niiar.ru/sites/default/files/safety20/sb_tez_xi_konf_orm_2019.pdf (accessed 01 Sep. 2023) (in Russian).
16. Kim K.-Y., Yang S.-T., Kim Y.-S. Development of Comprehensive Fuel Reliability Monitoring and Analysis Workstation i-FRIMA (Integrated Fuel Reliability Management System). Proceedings of 2010 LWR Fuel Performance/TopFuel/WRFPM. Orlando, Florida, USA, September 26 – 29, 2010. Paper 059. Available at: https://www.ans.org/meetings/file/view-194 (accessed 01 Sep. 2023).
17. Xin L., Changzheng L., Yang W., Hongyang Z., Yongjun D. Construction of the Failed Fuel Information Database Platform. 29th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering. Shenzhen, China, August 8 – 12, 2022, Paper No: ICONE29-93281, V014T14A008.
18. Wodtke C., Govella A. Information Architecture: Blueprints for the Web. Pearson Education, 2009, 312 p. Available at: https://pdfdrive.to/filedownload/information-architecture-blueprints-for-the-web(accessed 01 Sep. 2023).