+++

categories="article"
date="2024-03-18T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2024-01"
issue_name="2024 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/01/06.pdf"
first_page="74"
last_page="86"
udc="621.039.4"
title="New Technical Solutions for the Design of NPP Passive Safety Systems"
original_title="Новые технические решения для проектирования пассивных систем безопасности АЭС"
authors=["SolovievSL", "ZaryuginDG", "KalyakinSG", "LeskinST", "SolovievDS"]
tags=["passive safety systems", "hydrogen safety", "emergency core cooling", "hydrogen recombinator", "core melt"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.1.06"

+++


The article describes the new principle of passive NPP safety systems designing, in which the natural circulation of working fluid or gas is replaced by forced circulation in order to increase. The energy required by the system is converted from the emergency process itself, which this system resists when performing a given safety function. The goal is to expand the variety and capacity of passive NPP safety systems in order to optimize and reduce costs of NPP power units with various types of reactors while increasing the safety level. The proposed technical solutions are based on the use of direct non-mechanical conversion of the energy, comprised in emergency process, into electricity, and then into mechanical energy of hydraulic machine for working medium moving in a forced circulation mode. To demonstrate the proposed principles, the following technical solutions have been considered: 

• new passive electrochemical hydrogen recombinator for NPP with Light Water Reactors. Application of new techniques allowed increasing of the performance by weight of the recommended hydrogen simultaneously with increasing of the hydrogen torch threshold, as well as other important characteristics;

• passive emergency core cooling system for heavy liquid metal coolant reactors. Application of new techniques allowed increasing of the core remove heat capacity in order to scale down the main equipment;

• passive system for melt retention in the reactor core for Pressurized Water Reactors of high thermal capacity (more than 3000 MWe). Application of new techniques allowed increasing of the system thermal capacity in order to be able to apply to high thermal power reactors like VVER-1000 and more.

### References

