+++

categories="article"
date="2024-03-18T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2024-01"
issue_name="2024 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2024/01/10.pdf"
first_page="119"
last_page="131"
udc="621.039, 553.495 (063, 470)"
title="Forecasting the Cost and Volume of Uranium Mining for different World Nuclear Energy Development Scenario"
original_title="Прогнозирование себестоимости и объема добычи урана для разных сценариев  развития мировой ядерной энергетики"
authors=["MirkhusanovUT", "SemenovaDYu", "KharitonovVV"]
tags=["natural uranium", "cost of uranium mining", "nuclear energy development scenario", "uranium production"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2024.1.10"

+++

The paper presents a new analytical methodology for predicting the volume and cost of natural uranium production depending on uranium resources and scenarios for the development of traditional nuclear energy. The proposed methodology is based on a mathematical model of the dynamic process of exhaustion of fossil resources previously developed at MEPhI and uses the parameters of the explored mass of the fossil resource, the annual volume of production and the set rate of production growth. The three parameters known at the beginning of forecasting make it possible to describe the change in the resource base over time and solve a number of economic problems related to the extraction of valuable minerals. The paper provides forecasts of the NPP’s demand for natural uranium, depending on the scenarios for the development of global nuclear energy developed by the World Nuclear Association (WNA), uranium resources and volumes of its production with different costs for 2021–2022. It is shown that at a low rate (1.8%/year) of the installed capacity of nuclear power plants, uranium resources will last for more than a century, but the contribution of nuclear energy to electricity production will continuously decrease from the current 10%. Under high scenarios for the development of nuclear energy (>5%/year), which is possible under the conditions of intensification of the «green energy transition», the peak of uranium production may occur before the middle of this century. Based on these data, forecasts of the dynamics of uranium exhaustion and annual production volumes at fields with different costs are presented until the second half of this century, depending on the initial production growth rates determined by the scenario of nuclear energy development.

### References

1. Velihov E.P., Gagarinskij A.Yu., Subbotin S.A., Tsibulskij V.F. Energy in the economy of the XXI century. Moscow, IzdAT Publ., 2010, 176 p. ISBN 978-5-86656-246-6 (in Russian).
2. Simonov K.V. The global energy war. Series: Secrets of modern politics. Moscow, Algoritm Publ., 2007, 272 p. ISBN 978-5-9265-0496-2 (in Russian).
3. Ivanov G.A., Voloshin N.P., Ganeev A.S., Krupin F.P., Kuzminyh S.Yu., Litvinov B.V., Svaluhin A.I., Shibarshov L.I. Explosive deuterium energy. Snezhinsk, VNIITF Publ., 2004, 288 p. ISBN 5-85165-443-0:300 (in Russian).
4. World Energy Transitions Outlook 2022: 1.5°C Pathway. IRENA, Abu Dhabi, 2022, 352 p. 
5. Kondratiev V.B. The role of critical raw materials in conditions of economic uncertainty: the EU experience. Mining Industry, 2022, no. 4, pp. 94–102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.30686/1609-9192-2022-4-94-102.
6. Mansurov O.A., Ptitsyn P.B. Critically important minerals and materials for industry 4.0: production features and application prospects in global markets. Analytical report. Moscow, CARD of Private Enterprise for Nuclear Industry Scientific Development «Science and Innovations» Publ., 2022, 142 p. ISBN 978-5-498-00898-1 (in Russian).
7. Meadows D.H., Randers J., Meadows D.L. Limits of growth. 30 years later. Moscow, Akademkniga Publ., 2007, 342 p. ISBN 978-5-94628-218-5 (in Russian).
8. 17 Goals to Transform Our World. United Nations: Official Website. Available at: https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment (accessed Dec. 1, 2023).
9. Sustainable development. Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation: Official Website. Available at: https://rosatom.ru/sustainability/ (accessed Dec. 1, 2023) (in Russian).
10. The World Nuclear Supply Chain 2023. World Nuclear Association. Report No. 2023/002. August 2023, 165 p. ISBN: 978-0-9931019-8-4.
11. World Nuclear Performance Report 2023. World Nuclear Association. Report No. 2023/001. July 2023, 62 p. 
12. The Nuclear Fuel Report. Global Scenarios for Demand and Supply Availability 2023–2040. World Nuclear Association. Report No. 2023/003. September 2023, 258 p. ISBN: 978-0-9931019-9-1.
13. The White Paper on Nuclear Energy. Closed-loop NFC with fast reactors (gen. edit. Adamov E.O.). Moscow, NIKIET Publ., 2020, 502 р. ISBN: 978-5-98706-129-9 (in Russian).
14. Kharitonov V.V., UljaninYu.A., Sliva D.E. Analytical Modeling of Exhaustion Dynamics of Non-Renewable Traditional Energy Resources. Vestnik MEPhI. 2019, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 370–379 (in Russian). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S2304487X19030076
15. World Energy Outlook 2022. International Energy Agency, October 2022, 523 p. 
16. Uranium 2022: Resources, Production and Demand. A Joint Report by the Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency. OECD NEA No. 7634, 2023, 568 p. 
17. Zhivov V.L., Boitsov A.V., Shumilin M.V. Uranium: geology, mining, economics. Moscow, Atomredmet-zoloto. RIC VIMS Publ., 2012, 304 p. ISBN 978-5-901837-80-1 (in Russian).
18. Statistical Review of World Energy 2021. 70th edition. BP, 2021, 72 p. 
19. Uranium production cost study. UxC Special Report, August 2021, 124 p.
20. Kharitonov V.V., Kabashev K.V., Malikov R.R. Long–term exhaustion trends of traditional energy resources and prospects for nuclear energy. Мoscow, MEPhI Publ., 2016, 96 p. (in Russian)