+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="18"
udc="621.039"
title="Economic Advantages of Starting-up of Inherently Safe Fast Reactors with a Closed Fuel Cycle on Fortificated Uranium"
original_title="Экономические преимущества пуска внутренне безопасных быстрых реакторов с замкнутым топливным циклом на обогащенном уране"
authors=["OrlovMA"]
tags=["inherently safe fast reactor", "start-up with enriched uranium", "levelized cost of electricity", "economics"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.01"

+++

The publication substantiates the economic advantages of using in the starting loads of inherently safe fast reactors with a closed fuel cycle of enriched uranium instead of uranium-plutonium regenerate obtained by reprocessing of thermal reactors spent nuclear fuel (SNF). The justifications are given taking into account both the preliminary technical and economic assessments carried out by the basic enterprises of TVEL JSC and SHK JSC, and the neutron-physical and system-economic studies performed in the Private Institution of the ITCP Proryv (Breakthrough). It is shown that the starting-up of a fast reactor on enriched uranium instead of uranium-plutonium fuel, taking into account the costs of preliminary reprocessing of thermal reactors spent fuel, allows achieving a significant economic gain at the stage of construction and commissioning of nuclear power plants. It is also shown that even at moderately high values of the discount coefficient, the uranium start of a fast reactor with a closed fuel cycle is economically preferable in comparison with the option of starting on uranium-plutonium fuel from the positions of the break-even tariff.

### References

1. Adamov E.O., Orlov V.V., Filin A.I, Leonov V.N., Sila-Novitski A.G., Smirnov V.S., Tsikunov V.S. The Next Generation of Fast Reactors. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 1997, v. 173, iss. 1-3, pp. 143-150; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0029-5493(97)00098-8 .
2. Alemberti A., Tucek K., Takahashi M., Obara T., Kondo M., Moiseev A., Tocheny L., Smith C., Hwang I.S.,, Wu Y., Jin M. Lead-Cooled Fast Reactor (LFR) System Safety Assessment. Gen IV International Forum. 3 June 2020. Available at: https://www.gen-4.org/gif/upload/docs/application/pdf/2020-06/gif_lfr_ssa_june_2020_2020-06-09_17-26-41_202.pdf (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
3. Alemberti A., Mansani L., Frogheri M., Turcu I., Constantin M. The ALFRED Project. Conference Paper. November 2013. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264422929_The_ALFRED_Project (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
4. Tarantino M. ALFRED Overview and Safety Features. IXth Joint IAEA-GIF Technical Meeting/Workshop on the Safety of Liquid Metal Cooled Fast Reactors, 2021. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/52/041/52041029.pdf (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
5. Dorochova I. MYRRHA Accelerates. Atomnyj Ekspert. 2020, no. 1-2. Available at: https://atomicexpert.com/myrrha_uskoryaetsya (accessed Dec. 15, 2022) (in Russian).
6. Abderrahim H., Baeten P., Didier J. De Bruyn, Heyse J. MYRRHA, a Multipurpose Hybrid Research Reactor for High-end Applications. Nuclear Physics News. Feb. 2010, pp. 137-146. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/44812130_MYRRHA_a_Multipurpose_hYbrid_Research_Reactor_for_High-end_Applications (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
7. Shin Y.H., Park S., Kim B.S., Choi S. and Hwang I.S. Small Modular Reactor Development Plan in Korea. AIP Conference Proceedings. 2015, 1659, 020002; DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4916841 .
8. Pengcheng Zh., Chen Zh., Zhou T., Chen H. CFD Analysis of Thermal Stratification of China Lead Alloy Cooled Research Reactor (CLEAR-I). Proceedings of the 2013 XXI-st International Conference on Nuclear Engineering ICONE21. July 29 - August 2, 2013. Chengdu, China. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/262647071_CFD_Analysis_of_Thermal_Stratification_of_China_Lead_Alloy_Cooled_Research_Reactor_CLEAR-I (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
9. Varshavsky L.E. A Study of the Dynamics of NPP Operation Indicators (Using the Example of the US Nuclear Power Industry). Prikladnaya Econometrika. 2013. no. 30 (2), pp. 115-137 (in Russian).
10. Orlov M.A. Complex Discussion of Inherent Safety Fast Reactors Start-Up with Enriched Uranium Concept (Strategical, Economical Aspects, Problems of Neutron Physics etc.). R&D Program Proposal. Proc. of the Intern. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development, June 26-29, 2017, Yekaterinburg. STI/PUB/1836, 260 p.; 2018; ISBN: 978-92-0-108618-1. P. 238. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/13414/Fast-Reactors-and-Related-Fuel-Cycles-Next-Generation-Nuclear-Systems-for-Sustainable-Development-FR17 (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
11. Orlov M.A. Neutronics Analysis of Ways to Optimize the Transition Regime to Uranium-Plutonium Fuel of Equilibrium Composition During the Launch of Inherently Safe Fast Reactor on Enriched Uranium. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstanty. 2018, iss. 1, pp. 169-178 (in Russian).
12. Orlov M.A. Launch with Enriched Uranium as a Factor of Increasing the Investment Attractiveness of Inherently Safe Fast Reactors. Proc. of the V-th Inter. Scientific and Technical Conf. “Innovative Projects and Technologies of Nuclear Energy (ISTC NIKIET-2018)”, October 2-5, 2018. Moscow. NIKIET Publ., 2018, pp. 443-450 (in Russian).
13. Podvig P., Editor, with contributions by Arkhangelskiy N., Diakov A., Khlopkov A., Konukhov D., Kovchegin D., Miasnikov E. The Use of Highly-Enriched Uranium as Fuel in Russia. International Panel on Fissile Materials, Research Report No. 16. 2017. Available at: http://fissilematerials.org/blog/2017/09/the_use_of_highly-enriche.html (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
14. Reshetnikov F.G., Kotelnikov R.B., Rogozkin B.D., Bashlykov S.N., Samokhvalov I.A., Titov G.V., Shishkov M.G., Belevantsev V.S., Fedorov Yu.E., Simonov V.P.. Investigation of Methods for Manufacturing Cores from Monocarbide, Mononitride, and Uranium Carbonitride for Fuel Rods of Fast Neutron Reactors. Proc. of the Symposium on Fuel and Fuel Elements for Fast Reactors Held by the International Atomic Energy Agency in Brussels, 2-6 July 1973, pp. 25-46.
15. Rogozkin B.D., Stepennova N.M., Proshkin A.A.. Mononitride Fuel for Fast Reactors. Atomnaya Energiya. 2003, v. 95, iss. 3, pp. 208-221 (in Russian).
16. Rogozkin B.D., Stepennova N.M., Fedorov Yu.E., Shishkov M.G., Kryukov F.N., Kuzmin S.V., Nikitin O.N., Belyaeva A.V., Zabudko L.M. Results of U0.55Pu0.45N and U0.4Pu0.6N Mixed Mononitride Fuel Tests in a Bor-60 Reactor to Burnup 12% h.a. Atomnaya Energiya. 2011, v. 110, iss. 6, pp. 332-345. (in Russian).
17. Volkov I.A., Simonenko V.A., Makeeva I.R., Dyrda N.D., Belonogov M.N., Trapeznikov M.A. Use of Enriched Uranium in a Fast Reactor with Lead Coolant. Atomic Energy. 2016, v. 121, pp. 22-28; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0157-0 .
18. Adamov E.O., Ashurko Yu.M., Egorov A.V., Khomyakov Yu.S., Muratov A.G., Orlov M.A. Reactivity Margin in Equilibrium Cores of Liquid Metal Cooled Fast Reactors. Proc. of the Intern. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development, June 26-29, 2017, Yekaterinburg. STI/PUB/1836, 260 pp.; 2018; ISBN: 978-92-0-108618-1. P. 149. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/iaeabooks/13414/Fast-Reactors-and-Related-Fuel-Cycles-Next-Generation-Nuclear-Systems-for-Sustainable-Development-FR17 (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
19. Orlov V.V., Lemekhov V.V., Smirnov V.S., Umansky A.A. Method of Operation of a Fast Neutron Nuclear Reactor Running on Nitride Fuel, with Liquid Metal Coolant. Patent of the Russian Federation No. 2501100. Publication date: 10.12.2013 (in Russian).
20. Lizunov A.V., Solodov A.A. Method of Obtaining 15N Nitrogen Isotope. Institute of Safety Problems of Nuclear Power Development of the Russian Academy of Sciences Preprint. No. IBRAE-2015-04. Moscow. IBRAE RAS Publ., 2015, 35 p.
21. Available at: https://www.uxc.com/p/prices/UxCPrices.aspx (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
22. The Future of Nuclear Power. An Interdisciplinary MIT study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2003. ISBN 0-615-12420-8. Available at: https://web.mit.edu/nuclearpower/pdf/nuclearpower-full.pdf (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).
23. The Future of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle. An Interdisciplinary MIT study. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2011. ISBN 978-0-9828008-1-2. Available at: https://web.mit.edu/jparsons/www/publications/MIT%20Future_of_Nuclear_Fuel_Cycle.pdf (accessed Dec. 15, 2022).