+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/02.pdf"
first_page="19"
last_page="32"
udc="621.438"
title="Preliminary Assessment of the Characteristics of Brayton Cycle Equipment at Supercritical CO2 Parameters"
original_title="Предварительная оценка характеристик оборудования цикла Брайтона на сверхкритических параметрах СО2"
authors=["LeskinST", "SlobodchukVI", "ShelegovAS", "SolovievDS"]
tags=["Brayton cycle", "supercritical CO2", "liquid metal cooled reactors", "gas turbine", "degree of reactivity", "optimal ratio of speeds"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.02"

+++

A preliminary calculation of the main thermal and geometrical parameters of the whillspace of the turbine on supercritical carbon dioxide is presented. Turbines of this type are supposed to be used in the Brayton cycle of a nuclear power unit with a liquid metal coolant, the thermal efficiency of which can reach 50%. Calculation of the whillspace of the turbine was carried out using approach generally accepted in practice design of gas and steam turbines. As a result of the calculation, the main characteristics of the stages of the new turbine were obtained. Possible layout of the main thermal power equipment are considered in relation to a power unit with a BN-1200M reactor. On the basis of the performed preliminary calculations, the main determining parameters of the working cycle were obtained in relation to use at nuclear power plants with advanced liquid metal cooled reactor plants. The preliminary assessment of the characteristics of the main heat exchange equipment of the cycle was carried out.

### References

1. Bender M., Carlsmith R.S., Delene J.G., Gall, W. R., Goldman, A. E., Holcomb, R. S., Hoskins, R. E., Lackey, M. E., Lundin, M. I.,Myers, M. L., Robertson, R. C., Samuels, G., Terry, W., Zapp, F. C., Gas-Cooled Fast Reactor Concepts. USAEC Rep. ORNL-3642, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1964, 236 p.
2. Gokhshtein D.P., Verheweker G.P. Application of CO2  as a Coolant and Working Fluid at Nuclear Power Plants. Atomnaya Energiya, 1969, v. 26, no.4, pp. 378-380. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t26-4_1969/go,62/ (accessed May 3, 2022) (in Russian).
3. Dievoеt J. P. The Sodium-CO2 Fast Breeder Reactor Concept. Intern. Conf. on Sodium Technology and Large Fast Reactor Design, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, November 7-9, 1968.
4. Dostal V., Driscoll M.J., Hejzlar P. A Supercritical Carbon Dioxide for Next Generation Nuclear Reactors, MIT-ANP-TR-100, 2004, 326 p.
5. Altunin V.V. Thermophysical Properties of Carbon Dioxide. Moscow, Standard Publ., 1975, 553 p. (in Russian).
6. Golba V.S., Belozerov V.I. Calculation of the Flow Part of Steam Turbines. Obninsk. IATE Publ., 1990, 76p. (in Russian).
7. Komarov O.V., Blinov V.L., Shemyakinsky A.S. Thermal and Gas Dynamic Calculations of Gas Turbine Installations. Yekaterinburg. Ural University Press, 2018, 164p.
8. Feher E.G. The supercritical Thermodynamic Power Cycle. Energy Conversion, 1968, v. 8, no. 2, pp. 85-90; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-7480(68)90105-8 .
9. Lewis J., Clementoni E., Cox T. Effect of Compressor Inlet Temperature on Cycle Performance for a Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Brayton Cycle. The VI-th International Supercritical CO2  Power Cycles Symposium, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March 27 -29, 2018.
10. Heshmat H., Walton J.F., Cordova J.L. Technology Readiness of 5th and 6th Generation Compliant Foil Bearing for 10 MWE S-CO2  Turbomachinery Systems, The VI-th International Supercritical CO2  Power Cycles Symposium, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March 27 - 29, 2018.
11. Shultz R., Narayanaswamy A. Magnetic Bearings for Supercritical CO2 Turbomachinery. The VI-th International Supercritical CO2 Power Cycles Symposium, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March 27 - 29, 2018.
12. Zhua Y., Jianga Y., Lianga S., Guoa Y., Guoa Ch., Yuea P. Numerical study of super-critical carbon dioxide flow in stepped-staggered labyrinth seals. The VI-th International Supercritical CO2 Power Cycles Symposium, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March 27 - 29, 2018.
13. Li F., Pei B., Chen Z., Bai B. Study of Flow and Heat Transfer of CO2  at Supercritical Pressure. The VI-th International Supercritical CO2 Power Cycles Symposium, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, March 27 - 29, 2018.
14. Angelino G. Carbon Dioxide Condensation Cycles for Power Production, Journal of Engineering for Power. 1968, v. 90, no. 3, pp. 287-295; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3609190 .
15. Angelino G. Real Gas Effects in Carbon Dioxide Cycles, ASME Paper No. 69-GT-102. 1969, 12 p.; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/69-GT-102 .
16. Dievoеt J. P. The Sodium-CO2  Fast Breeder Reactor Concept, International Conference on Sodium Technology and Large Fast Reactor Design, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois, November 7-9, 1968.
17. Rassokhin N.G. Steam Generating Units of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 384 p. (in Russian).
18. PNAE G-7-002-86. Norms for Calculating the Strength of Equipment and Pipelines of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 525 p. (in Russian).
19. Kirillov P.L., Yuriev Yu.S., Bobkov V.P. Handbook of Thermohydraulic Calculations (Nuclear Reactors, Heat Exchangers, Steam Generators). Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1984, 296 p. (in Russian).
20. Idelchik I.E., Handbook of Hydraulic Resistances. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1992, 672 p. (in Russian).
21. Chai L., Tassou S.A. A Review of Printed Circuit Heat Exchangers for Helium and Supercritical CO2  Brayton Cycles. Thermal Science and Engineering Progress. 2020, no. 18, pp. 1-22; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsep.2020.100543 .