+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/03.pdf"
first_page="33"
last_page="43"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Application of Small Perturbation Theory for Assessing Variations of Prompt Neutron Lifetime in a Lead-Cooled Fast Reactor"
original_title="Использование теории малых возмущений для оценки изменений времени жизни мгновенных нейтронов в быстром реакторе со свинцовым теплоносителем"
authors=["ApseVA", "ShmelevAN", "KulikovGG", "KulikovEG"]
tags=["small perturbation theory", "bilinear ratios", "prompt neutron lifetime", "contributions of neutron reactions"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.03"

+++

The paper considers the applicability of small perturbation theory to assessing the variations of the prompt neutron lifetime caused by variations in the isotope composition of a lead-cooled fast reactor. The generalized small perturbation theory formulas have been developed to calculate derivatives of the prompt neutron lifetime regarded as a bilinear neutron flux and neutron worth ratio. A numerical algorithm has been proposed for the step-by-step application of the small perturbation theory formulas to assess the prompt neutron lifetime variations caused by a major perturbation in the reactor isotope composition, e.g. by the complete change of the material used earlier as the neutron reflector. The advantage of the proposed approach has been shown which consists in that it is basically possible to determine the role of different neutron reactions, isotopes and energy groups in and their contributions to the total prompt neutron lifetime variation caused by major changes in the reactor isotope composition.

### References

1. Stumbur E.A. Application of Perturbation Theory in the Physics of Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1976, 128 p. (in Russian).
2. Apse V.A., Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Sirotkin A.M. On the Possibility of Improving the Neutron-Physical and Thermal-Hydraulic Parameters of Fast Reactors Using Radiogenic Lead as a Coolant. Yadernaya Fizika i Inzhiniring. 2010, v. 1, no. 5, pp. 387-397 (in Russian).
3. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Apse V.A., Artisyuk V.V. Principal Physical Advantages from Applying Radiogenic Lead as a Coolant of Nuclear Reactors. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedenij. Atomnaya Energrtika. 2010, no. 3, pp. 39-47. Available at: https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/journals/2010/03.pdf (accessed Oct. 27, 2022) (in Russian).
4. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kryuchkov E.F., Apse V.A., Kulikov E.G. Application of Radiogenic Lead with Dominant Content of 208Pb for Long Prompt Neutron Lifetime in Fast Reactors. Nuclear Technology. 2013, v. 183, pp. 409-426; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/nt13-a19429.
5. Kulikov G.G., Shmelev A.N., Kulikov E.G., Apse V.A., Chubko N.V. The Role of Fast Reactor Reflector Neutrons in Increasing the Resistance of a Fission Chain Reaction to Rapid Runaway. Atomnaya Energiya. 2017, v. 123, no. 6, pp. 351-352. Available at: http://elib.biblioatom.ru/text/atomnaya-energiya_t123-6_2017/go,50/ (accessed Oct. 27, 2022) (in Russian).
6. Apse V.A., Sirotkin A.M., Shmelev A.N. Estimation of the Sensitivity of the Lifetime of Prompt Neutrons to the Isotopic Composition of a Nuclear Reactor Using the Theory of Small Perturbations. Sovremennye Problemy Nauki i Obrazovaniya. 2012, no. 6. Available at: https://science-education.ru/ru/article/view?id=7354 (accessed Oct. 27, 2022) (in Russian).
7. Kantorovich L.V., Akilov G.P. Functional Analysis. Saint Petersburg. Nevsky Dialekt Publ., 2004, 816 p. (in Russian).
8. Khromov V.V. Neutron Value Functions, Neutron Field Lagrangians, Perturbation Theory Formulas. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 1989, 48 p. (in Russian).
9. Apse V.A., Shmelev A.N. The Use of the TIME26 Program in Course Design of Fast Reactors and Power Plants. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2008, 64 p. (in Russian).
10. Orlov V.V., Leonov V.N., Sila-Novitskiy A.G. Design of BREST Reactors. Experimental Work to Substantiate the Concept of BREST Reactors. Results and Plans. Proc. of the International Seminar «Fast Reactor and Natural Safety Fuel Cycle for Large$Scale Energy. Fuel Balance, Economics, Security, Waste, Nonproliferation». Moscow, 2000. Report no. 13 (in Russian).