+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/05.pdf"
first_page="57"
last_page="69"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimental Studies into the Non-Isothermal Mixing of Incompressible Liquid Counterflows in a Y-junction"
original_title="Экспериментальное исследование процессов неизотермического смешения встречных потоков несжимаемой жидкости в тройниковом узле"
authors=["RyazapovRR", "SobornovAE", "DmitrievSM", "MatsinNV", "KotinAV"]
tags=["temperature pulsations", "thermal pulsations", "coolant", "non-isothermal mixing", "lifetime", "durability", "tracer", "coolant", "power facility", "Y-junction"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.05"

+++

The processes involved in non-isothermal mixing of coolant flows in the power equipment components at water-cooled reactor plants are accompanied by thermal pulsations, the intensity of which can reach values leading to fatigue failure. Using numerical methods allows one to obtain the thermal pulsation characteristics required to assess the equipment life. The calculation results, however, need to be validated based on the experimentally obtained fields of the fluid’s thermal and hydrodynamic parameters. The flow structure during non-isothermal mixing in a Y-junction was studied experimentally to get an idea about the thermal pulsation occurrence mechanism and characteristics.

The experimental facility is a hydraulically closed circuit with water used as the coolant. The experimental model is geometrically similar to the section that forms part of a high-temperature test bench for investigation of the thermal cyclic load effects on the lifetime of the power equipment structural materials. The model is a Y-junction composed of the main pipe and an angled peripheral pipe with the “counter injection” of coolant flows. The geometrical similarity coefficient is 4/3. The model material is transparent organic glass. The flow structure was visualized through the injection into the flow of ink with the density similar to that of the coolant flow. The tracer was injected sequentially at four points with video records made of the mixing process with a frequency of 30 Hz. Thermocouples were used to measure the temperature.

The mixing process video records were synchronized with the experimental temperature field recording. The formation of the vortexes in the mixing zone was tracked. The vortex scales, the time-averaged flow temperature profiles, and the thermal pulsation intensity profiles were determined. A combined analysis of the flow structure and temperature fields made it possible to explain the nature of thermal pulsations in the frontal region relative to the peripheral pipe.

### References

1. Abib E., Bergholz S., Rudolph J. German Experiences in Local Fatigue Monitoring. International Journal for Nuclear Power. 2013, v. 58, pp. 284-289.
2. Chapuliot S., Gourdin C., Payen T., Magnaud J.P., Monavon A. Hydro-Thermal-Mechanical Analysis of Thermal Fatigue in a Mixing Tee. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2005, v. 235,.pp. 575-596; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2004.09.011 .
3. Faidy C. High Cycle Thermal Fatigue: Lessons Learned From Civaux Event. In: Materials Reliability Program: Second International Conference on Fatigue of Reactor Components (MRP184), July 29-August 1, 2002, Snowbird, Utah. – 2002.
4. Sudakov A.V., Trofimov A.S. Temperature Pulsations and Durability of Power Equipment Elements. Leningrad. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 176 p. (in Russian).
5. Sudakov A.V., Trofimov A.S. Stresses at Temperature Pulsations. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1980, 64 p. (in Russian).
6. Budov V.M., Dmitriev S.M, Forced Heat Exchangers of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1989, 174 p. (in Russian).
7. NP-054-04. Norms for Calculating the Strength of Equipment Elements and Pipelines for Ship Nuclear Steam Generating Plants with Pressurized Water Reactors. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Rossii Publ., 2004 (in Russian).
8. Jhung M.J. Assessment of Thermal Fatigue in Mixing Tee by FSI Analysis. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2013, v. 45, pp. 99-106; DOI: https://doi.org/10.5516/NET.09.2012.026 .
9. Mahaffy J., Chung B., Dubois F., Ducros F., Graffard E., Heitsch M., Henriksson M., Komen E., Moretti F., Morii T., Muhlbauer P., Rohde U., Scheuerer M., Smith B. L., Song C., Watanabe T., Zigh G. Best Practice Guidelines for the Use of CFD in Nuclear Reactor Safety Applications. NEA/CSNI/R(2007) 5. 2007. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/44/037/44037877.pdf?r=1 (accessed Oct. 05,2022).
10. Smith B.L. Assessment of CFD Codes Used in Nuclear Reactor Safety Simulations. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2010, v. 42, pp. 339-364; DOI: https://doi.org/10.5516/NET.2010.42.4.339 .
11. Smith B.L., Andreani M., Bieder U., Ducros F., Graffard E., Heitsch M., Henrikkson M., Hohne T., Houkema M., Komen E., Mahaffy J., Menter F., Moretti F., Morii T., Muhlbauer P., Rohde U., Scheuerer M., Song C.H., Watanabe T., Zigh G. Assessment of CFD Codes for Nuclear Reactor Safety Problems – Revision 2. OECD/NEA/CSNI/R(2014) 12. 2015. Available at: https://inis.iaea.org/collection/NCLCollectionStore/_Public/46/066/46066598.pdf?r=1 (accessed Oct. 05, 2022).
12. Smith B.L., Bestion D., Hassan Y. Experiments and CFD Code Applications to Nuclear Reactor Safety (XCFD4NRS). Special Issue: Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2010, v. 240, pp. 2075-2382; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2010.06.037 .
13. Wakamatsu M., Nei H., Hashiguchi K. Attenuation of Temperature Fluctuations in Thermal Striping. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 1995, v. 32, pp. 752-762; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.1995.9731770 .
14. Beaufils R., Courtin S. Analysis of the Father Experiment with an Engineering Method Devoted to High Cycle Thermal Fatigue. In: Proc. of the ASME 2011 Pressure Vessels & Piping Conference (PVP 2011), July 17-21, 2011, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. 2011; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/PVP2011-57630 .
15. Bescherov D.E., Bolshukhin M.A., Kozin A.V., Lebedev V.V., Panov V.A., Pakhomov V.A., Sveshnikov D.N., Shishulin D.N., Legchanov M.A., Ryazapov R.R. Verification of the Methodology for Calculating the Fatigue Strength of Reactor Plant Equipment Under Nonstationary Thermocyclic Loads. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2019, no. 1 (124), pp. 81-91 (in Russian).
16. Dmitriev S.M., Mamaev A.V., Ryazapov R.R., Sobornov A.E., Kotin A.V., Bescherov D.E., Bolshukhin M.A. Experimental Studies of Temperature Pulsations During the Process of Mixing Non-Isothermal Coolant Flows in Nuclear Reactor Equipment Components. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 117-127; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.10 (in Russian).
17. Dmitriev S.M., Ryazapov R.R., Mamaev A.V., Sobornov A.E., Kotin A.V., Legchanov M.A., Lvov A.V. Measuring the Temperature and Stress-Strain States of a Tube Sample under the Local Stochastic Temperature Pulsations. Pribory i Metody Izmerenij. 2019, v. 10, no. 1, pp. 53-60; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21122/2220-9506-2019-10-1-53-60 (in Russian).
18. Courtin S. High Cycle Thermal Fatigue Damage Prediction in Mixing Zones of Nuclear Power Plants: Engineering Issues Illustrated on the FATHER Case. Procedia Engineering. 2013, v. 66, pp. 240-249; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2013.12.079.
19. Miyoshi K., Kamaya M., Utanohara Y., Nakamura A. An Investigation of Thermal Stress Characteristics by Wall Temperature Measurements at a Mixing Tee. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2016, v. 298, pp. 109-120; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2015.12.004 .
20. Braillard O., Edelin D. Advanced Experimental Tools Designed for the Assessment of the Thermal Load Applied to the Mixing Tee and Nozzle Geometries in the PWR Plant. In: Advancements in Nuclear Instrumentation, Measurement Methods and their Applications, ANIMMA 2009, June 7-10, 2009, Marseille, France. 2009. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/ANIMMA.2009.5503718 .
21. Chen M.S., Hsieh H.E., Ferng Y.M., Pei B.S. Experimental Observations of Thermal Mixing Characteristics in T-junction Piping. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2014, v. 276, pp. 107-114; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2014.03.052 .
22. Kamide H., Igarashi M., Kawashima S., Kimura N., Hayashi K. Study on Mixing Behavior in a Tee Piping and Numerical Analyses for Evaluation of Thermal Striping. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2009, v. 239, pp. 58-67; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2008.09.005 .
23. Kuschewski M. Development and Application of Flow Measurement Methods for the Investigation of Near1Wall Temperature Fields. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Stuttgart, 2015. No: D93.
24. Bolshukhin M.A., Znamenskaya I.A., Sveshnikov D.N., Fomichev V.M. Thermographic Research of Turbulent Water Pulsations at Non-Isothermal Mixing. Avtometriya. 2014, no. 5, pp. 75-83. Available at: https://www.sibran.ru/upload/iblock/50e/50ec77015b0e7a9a575e6f4ff3a24e00.pdf (accessed Oct. 05, 2022) (in Russian).
25. Znamenskaya I.A., Koroteeva E.Yu., Novinskaya A.M., Sysoev N.N. Features of Turbulent Pulsations Spectra of Submerged Jet Water Flows. Pis’ma v Zhurnal Tekhnicheskoy Fiziki. 2016, v. 42, no. 13, pp. 51-57. Available at: https://journals.ioffe.ru/articles/viewPDF/43399 (accessed Oct. 05, 2022) (in Russian).