+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/07.pdf"
first_page=""82
last_page="95"
udc="614.876:539.16.08:061.6-051"
title="Improvement of the System of Dosimetric Control of Neutron Exposure of Staff of Novovoronezh Nuclear Power Plant"
original_title="Совершенствование системы дозиметрического контроля нейтронного облучения персонала Нововоронежcкой атомной станции"
authors=["EkidinAA", "PovarovVP", "RosnovskiySV", "SizovaLV", "PyshkinaMD", "VasilyevAV", "VasyanovichME", "NazarovEI", "PudovkinAV", "KozhemyakinVA"]
tags=["neutron radiation", "neutron energy", "exposure dose", dosimeter", "phantom"]
rubric = "safety"
rubric_name = "Global safety, reliability and diagnostics of nuclear power installations"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.07"

+++

Based on current scientific data, recommendations of international organizations, and novel instruments and techniques, studies have been planned and undertaken for the energy and angular distribution of neutron radiation in the Novovoronezh NPP’s workrooms. The average values of the neutron energy within the surveyed rooms are in a broad range of 0.07 to 2.8 MeV. The obtained experimental data made it possible to determine the actual values of the ambient dose equivalent rate, H(10) and the individual dose equivalent, Hp(10), as well as to justify the correction factors for all measuring tools used for personal radiation monitoring and for radiation monitoring in workrooms. Correction factors have been determined that take into account the difference between the verification (calibration) spectrum and the field that occurs in the personnel workrooms. All workrooms are divided into 4 groups: spectra with a major fast neutron component (correction factor of 0.9); spectra with a major component of both fast and thermal neutrons (correction factor of 0.7); spectra consisting predominantly of thermal and intermediate neutrons (correction factor of 0.3); workrooms with the neutron radiation AEDR below the lower limit of the permissible instrument measurement; and the fresh fuel storage facility (correction factor of 1.0).

### References

1. Pyshkina M.D., Nikitenko V.O., Zhukovskiy M.V., Ekidin A.A. The Uncertainties of Neutron Personal Dosimeter Readings in Workplace Fields. ANRI. 2018, no. 4 (95), pp. 15-23. Available at: https://www.doza.ru/anry/archive/95/15-23.pdf (accessed Sep. 24, 2022) (in Russian).
2. Pyshkina M.D., Vasilyev A.V., Ekidin A.A., Nazarov E.I., Romanova M.A., Gurinovich V.I., Komar D.I., Kozhemyakin V.A. Neutron Dosimetry at Workplaces of Institute of Nuclear Materials JC. Radiatsionnaya Gigiena. 2021, no. 14 (2), pp. 89-99; DOI: https://doi.org/10.21514/1998-426X-2021-14-2-89-99 (in Russian).
3. Alekseev A.G., Pikalov V.A., Alekseev P.A. Correction Coefficients for Measuring the Ambient Dose Equivalent Rate of Neutrons. ANRI. 2021, no. 4 (107), pp. 32-40; DOI: https://doi.org/10.37414/2075-1338-2021-107-4-32-40 (in Russian).
4. Pyshkina M.D., Vasilyev A.V., Ekidin A.A., Nazarov E.I., Pudovkin A.V., Nikitenko V.O., Gurinovich V.I., Komar D.I., Kozhemyakin V.A. Occupational Еxposure to Neutrons at the Beloyarsk NPP. ANRI. 2021, no. 3 (106), pp. 16-26; DOI: https://doi.org/10.37414/2075-1338-2021-106-3-16-26 (in Russian).
5. Pyshkina M., Vasilyev A., Ekidin A., Nazarov E., Nikitenko V., Pudovkin A. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2021, v. 53, iss. 5, pp. 1723-1729; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.10.015 .
6. Pyshkina M.D., Vasilyev A.V., Ekidin A.A., Zhukovsky M.V. Development and Testing of a Neutron Radiation Spectrometer in Fields of Radionuclide Sources. AIP Conference Proceedings. Proceedings of the XXIII-rd International Scientific Conference of Young Scientists and Specialists, AYSS 2019. American Institute of Physics Inc, 2019. P. 070003.
7. Pyshkina M.D., Vasilyev A.V., Ekidin A.A. A Neutron Spectrum Reconstruction for Purposes of Personnel Dosimetry: Modelling Study. AIP Conference Proceedings. Ser. “International Conference of Computational Methods in Sciences and Engineering 2020, ICCMSE 2020”, 2021. P. 040011.
8. International Standard ISO 8529. Switzerland, International Standard Organization, 2001.