+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="09"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/09.pdf"
first_page="108"
last_page="120"
udc="621.039.546"
title="Evolution of the Hydride Structure in Irradiated E110 Alloy in the Process of Thermomechanical Treatment Simulating Supercritical Dry Storage Conditions"
original_title="Эволюция структуры гидридов в облученном сплаве Э110 при термомеханических испытаниях, имитирующих закритические (предельные) режимы сухого хранения"
authors=["KurskiyRA", "SafonovDV", "ZabusovOO", "FrolovAS", "MaltsevDA", "RozhkovAV", "ShishkinAA"]
tags=["hydrides", "dry storage", "fuel rod cladding", "zirconium alloys", "E110"]
rubric = "materials"
rubric_name = "Nuclear materials"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.09"

+++

The paper investigates irradiated samples of fuel rod cladding made from E110 (Zr-1% Nb) alloy following thermomechanical treatment simulating supercritical dry storage conditions for the VVER-1000 reactor spent nuclear fuel. The thermomechanical treatment conditions included isothermal annealing of gas-pressurized samples at temperatures of 380 to 400°С and hoop stresses of up to 100 MPa for 100 and 200 days. An optical microscopy examination has revealed the formation of a radial hydride structure. A microstructure examination based on electron microscopy techniques has revealed minor changes in the volume fraction of secondary phases after the thermomechanical treatment, as well as an increase in the volume fraction of hydrides and annealing of radiation defects. Tensile tests of ring samples at room temperature have shown that, following the thermomechanical treatment, the samples with an increased fraction of radial hydrides demonstrated a decreased material plasticity performance as compared with the irradiated material after in-pile operation.

### References

1. Kalinkin V.I., Kritskiy V.G., Tokarenko A.I., Tikhonov N.S., Razmashkin N.V., Serova A.L. Storage of Spent Nuclear Fuel of Commercial Reactors. St. Petersburg. VNIPIET JSC Publ., 2009, 124 p. (in Russian).
2. Billone M.C., Burtseva T.A., Einziger R.E. Ductile-to-brittle transition temperature for high-burnup cladding alloys exposed to simulated drying-storage conditions. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2013, v. 433, pp. 431-448; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnucmat.2012.10.002 .
3. Min S.J., Won J.J., Kim K.T. Terminal cool-down temperature-dependent hydride reorientations in Zr-Nb Alloy claddings under dry storage conditions. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2014. v. 448, pp. 172-183; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnucmat.2014.02.007 .
4. Aliev T., Likhanskii V., Evdokimov I., Ivonin D., Kolesnik M., Sorokin A., Ulibishev K., Zborovskii V., Elkin N., Chernetsky M., Khoruzhii O., Zvir E., Ilyin P., Gurovich B., Zabusov O., Proselkov V. Software package for safety analysis of dry storage regimes of spent Russian nuclear fuel. Proc. of the XII1th International Conference on WWER Fuel Performance, Modelling and Experimental Support. Nesebar (Bulgaria), September 16-23, 2017, pp. 381-386.
5. Nikulin S.A. Zirconium Alloys for Commercial Nuclear Reactors. Heat1Resistant and Radiation1Resistant. Moscow. MISIS Publ., 2007, 92 p. (in Russian).
6. Khatamian D., Ling V.C. Hydrogen Solubility Limits in α-and β-Zirconium. Journal of Alloys and Compounds. 1997, v. 253-254, pp. 162-166; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-8388(96)02947-7 .
7. Rashid J., Machiels A. Threat of Hydride Re-Orientation to Spent Fuel Integrity During Transportation Accidents: Myth or Reality? Proc. of the 2007 International LWR Fuel Performance Meeting, San Francisco, California, Sep. 30 – Oct. 3, 2007, pp. 464-471.
8. Kamimura K. Integrity criteria of spent fuel for dry storage in Japan. Proc. of the International Seminar on Spent Fuel Storage. Tokyo, Japan, November 15 – 17, 2010, 30 pp.
9. Kurskiy R.A., Safonov D.V., Rozhkov A.V., Zabusov O.O., Frolov A.S., Kuleshova E.A., Alekseeva E.V., Bragin A.S., Vasil’eva E.A., Gaiduchenko A.B., Mal’tsev D.A., Skundin M.A. Reorientation of Hydrides in Unirradiated Clad Tubes Made of Alloy E110 Under Conditions Simulating Long-Term Dry Storage of Spent Nuclear Fuel. Physics of Metals and Metallography. 2021, v. 122, pp. 861-868; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0031918X21090076 .
10. Kurskiy R.A., Rozhkov A.V., Zabusov O.O., Gaiduchenko A.B., Bragin A.S., Maltsev D.A., Safonov D.V., Shishkin A.A. Factors Influencing Reorientation of Hydrides in Unirradiated Cladding Tubes from E110 Alloy Under Conditions of Long-Term Dry Storage of SNF. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2021, v. 84, pp. 1665-1671; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063778821100203 .
11. Gurovich B.A., Frolov A.S., Kuleshova E.A., Maltsev D.A., Safonov D.V., Alekseeva E.V. TEM-Studies of the Dislocation Loops and Niobium-Based Precipitates in E110 Alloy After Operation in VVER-Type Reactor Conditions. Materials Characterization. 2019, v. 150, pp. 22-30; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchar.2019.01.014 .
12. Gurovich B.A., Frolov A.S., Kuleshova E.A., Maltsev D.A., Safonov D.V., Kochkin V.N., Alexeeva E.V., Stepanov N.V. Degradation of Fuel Rods Materials Based on Zirconium After Operation in VVER-Type Reactors. Voprosy Materialovedeniya. 2018, v. 3 (95), pp. 191-205; DOI: https://doi.org/10.22349/1994-6716-2018-95-3-191-205 (in Russian).
13. Woo O.T., Carpenter G.J.C. EELS Characterization of Zirconium Hydrides. Microscopy Microanalysis Microstructures. 1992, v. 3, pp. 35-44; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1051/mmm:019920030103500 .
14. Kursky R.A., Rozhkov A.V., Zabusov O.O., Maltsev D.A., Skundin M.A., Bandura A.P., Vasilieva E.A., Shishkin A.A. Influence of Thermomechanical Exposure on the Structure of Hydrides in Irradiated E110 Alloy Cladding Pipes Under the Conditions of Long-Term Dry Storage of Spent Nuclear Fuel. Voprosy Materialovedeniya. 2022, v. 1 (109), pp. 199-214; DOI: https://doi.org/10.22349/1994-6716-2022-109-1-199-214 (in Russian).
15. Shishalova G.V., Kobylyansky G.P., Novikov A.M., Volkova I.N. Measurement of Hydrogen Content in Oxide Films and Metal of Water-Cooled Reactor FA Components Made of Zirconium Alloys. Proc. of the XI1th Conference on Reactor Materials Science. Dimitrovgrad. SSC RIAR JSC, 2019, pp. 142-144 (in Russian).
16. Zielinski A., Sobieszczyk S. Hydrogen-enhanced degradation and oxide effects in zirconium alloys for nuclear applications. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy. 2011, v. 36, pp. 8619-8629; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.04.002 .
17. Kobylyansky G.P., Mazaev A.O., Nikitin O.N., Obukhov A.V., Il’in P.A., Zvir E.A. Fuel and Claddings of the VVER-1000 Fuel Rods After Thermal Tests Under the Conditions Simulating the Dry Storage Conditions. Sbornik Trudov AO GNTs NIIAR. 2018, v. 4, pp. 12-22 (in Russian).
18. Einziger R.E., Tsai H.C., Billone M.C., Hilton B.A. Examination of Spent PWR Fuel Rods After 15 Years in Dry Storage. Proc. of the X1th Intern. Conf. on Nuclear Engineering. Arlington, Virginia, USA, April 14 – 18, 2002, pp. 351-358; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1115/ICONE10-22456 .