+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/10.pdf"
first_page="121"
last_page="131"
udc="621.039.534:541.15"
title="A Method to Calculate the Stress-Strain State of a Cylinder Using Quadratic Radius Functions for Approximation of Stress and Displacement Rates"
original_title="Метод расчета напряженно-деформированного состояния цилиндра при аппроксимации скоростей напряжений и перемещений квадратичными функциями радиуса"
authors=["GaninaSM", "ZabudkoLM", "MarinenkoEE", "FolomeevVI"]
tags=["stress strain state", "approximation", "system of differential equations", "solution algorithm", "analytical test", "fuel pin", "fast reactor", "mixed uranium plutonium nitride fuel", "DRAKON code"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.10"

+++

An analytical test and the stress-strain state calculation for an experimental fuel pin of the BN-600 reactor with mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel show that the accuracy of solving a system of equations based on quadratic approximation with a small number of radial points (< 50) is no worse than that for a system of equations using linear approximation with a much larger number of radial points (> 200).

A method is proposed for solving the problem of the stress-strain state (SSS) of a cylinder in a two-dimensional RZ geometry based on approximating radial stress and displacement variation rates by quadratic functions within the radial layer. The discrete approximation used makes it possible to simplify formal calculations when obtaining the resulting systems of equations, and to reduce the calculation time while maintaining high accuracy of the parameter calculation.

The cylinder SSS calculation model and method proposed can be used in codes designed to calculate the SSS for the fast reactor fuel pins with different types of fuel for increasing accuracy with much less calculation time spent. This is important for many parametric studies, as well as when using engineering codes as part of integral codes.

### References

1. Likhachyov Yu.I, Pupko V.Ya. Strength of Reactor Fuel Elements. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975. 277 p. (in Russian).
2. Timoshenko S.P. Sthrength of Materials. Part II. Advanced Theory and Problems. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1965. 480 p. (in Russian).
3. Ganina S.M., Folomeev V.I., Marinenko E.E., Zabudko L.M. Problems of Calculation Modelling of Nitride Fuel Performance: DRAKON Code. / Proc. of the IAEA5CN245563, FR17. June 2017, Yekaterinburg, Russia. Available at: https://conferences.iaea.org/event/126/contributions/3642/ (accessed Jul. 25, 2022).
4. Rogozkin B.D., Stepennova N.M., Fedorov Yu.Ye., Shishkov M G., Kryukov F.N., Kuzmin S.V., Nikitin O.N., Belyaeva A.V., Zabudko L.M. Results of Irradiation of (U0.55Pu0.45)N and (U0.4Pu0.6)N Fuels in BOR-60 up to ~ 12 at % Burn-up. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 2013, v. 440, iss. 1-3, pp. 445-456; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnucmat.2013.04.033 .
5. Grachev A.F., Zherebtsov A.A., Zabudko L.M. , Zvir E.A., Kryukov F.N., Nikitin O.N., Skupov M.V., Ivanov Yu.A., Porollo S.I. Results of Investigations of BREST-Type Reactor Fuel Rods with Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Nitride Fuel, Irradiated in BOR-60 and BN-600. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 125, pp. 314-321; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00487-4 .
6. Adamov E.O., Grachev A.F., Zabudko L.M., Lachkanov E.V., Mochalov Yu.S., Belyaeva A.V., Kryukov F.N., Ivanov Yu.A., Skupov M.V., Marinenko E.E., Porollo S.I. Key Outcomes of Comprehensive Computational and Experimental Validation of Fuel Rods with Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Nitride Fuel for the BN-1200 and Brest Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2022, v. 131, pp. 268-273; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-022-00877-1 .
7. Zabudko L.M., Grachev A.F, Zherebtsov A.A., Lachkanov E.V., Mochalov Yu.S., Skupov M.V., Ivanov Yu.A., Kryukov F.N., Zvir E.A. Status on Performance Study of Mixed Nitride Fuel Pins of BREST Reactor Type. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2021, v. 384, 111430; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2021.111430 .
8. Boldyrev A.V., Zadorozhnyi A.V., Ozrin V.D., Tarasov V.I., Dolinskii I.O., Chernov S.Yu. Berkut Code Validation on Post-Reactor Studies of Irradiated Bn-600 Fuel Rods with Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Nitride Fuel. Atomic Energy. 2020, v. 127, pp. 356-361; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00636-0 .
9. Lainet M., Michel B., Dumas J-C., Samuelsson K., Pelletier M. Current status and progression of GERMINAL fuel performance code for SFR oxide fuel pins. Proc. or the IAEA5 CN2455222, FR17. June 2017, Yekaterinburg, Russia. Available at: https://conferences.iaea.org/event/126/contributions/3697/ (accessed Jul. 25, 2022).
10. Matthews C., Galloway J., Unal C., Novascone S., Williamson R. BISON for Metallic Fuels Modeling. Proc. of the IAEA5CN2455366, FR17. June 2017, Yekaterinburg, Russia. Available at: https://conferences.iaea.org/event/126/contributions/3512/ (accessed Jul. 25, 2022).