+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/11.pdf"
first_page="132"
last_page="143"
udc="621.039.526"
title="Cross-Verification of the Neutron-Physical Codes CORNER and MCU-FR on Models of Advanced Fast Neutron Reactors"
original_title="Кросс-верификация нейтронно-физических кодов CORNER и MCU-FR на моделях перспективных реакторов на быстрых нейтронах"
authors=["BereznevVP", "KoltashevDA", "ShuryginRE"]
tags=["CORNER", "MCU-FR", "cross-verification", "sodium cooled fast reactor", "lead-cooled fast reactor", "neutron-physical characteristics"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.11"

+++

The article considers the cross-verification results for deterministic code CORNER based on the method of discrete ordinates and precision code MCU-FR based on Monte Carlo methods based on lead and sodium-cooled reactor core models. The work relevance is due to the need to conduct cross-verification due to the lack of experiments for designed reactors when certifying a new version of the code. For this, test models of cores (cores) of a lead-cooled fast reactor and a sodium-cooled fast reactor were prepared. Calculations of integral characteristics: control rods efficiency, void reactivity and Doppler effect, reactivity margin and the effective delayed neutron fraction are performed for lead- and sodium-cooled fast neutron reactors core models. Also power distributions calculated by both codes are compared. According to the calculation results the maximum deviation of the control rods efficiency does not exceed 8% for the sodium-cooled reactor core model and 4% for the lead-cooled one. The deviation of the Doppler coefficients does not exceed 3.6% for the lead-cooled model and 6.8% for the sodium-cooled one. The maximum power deviation is 3.1% for the lead-cooled model and 5.9% for the sodium-cooled one. The reactivity margin deviation does not exceed 1.9% for the lead-cooled model and 2.7% for the sodium-cooled one. The maximum deviation of the effective delayed neutron fraction is 1.3% for the lead-cooled model and 0.54% for the sodium-cooled one. Materials for CORNER code certification are prepared based on this work.

### References

1. Bereznev V. P., Seleznev E. F., Asatryan D. S. The «CORNER» neutronics calculation code. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 1, pp. 136-143; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.1.15 (in Russian).
2. Bereznev V. P. Development of the CORNER Neutron4Physical Code for the Analysis of Stationary and Non4Stationary Processes in Fast Neutron Reactors. Cand. Sci. (Engineering) Diss. Moscow. Nuclear Safety Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences Publ., 2017, 96 p. (in Russian).
3. Shurygin R.E., Bereznev V.P., Koltashev D.A. The Results of Cross-Verification of the Neutron-Physical Codes CORNER and MCU-FR Based on the Model of the Core of a Fast Reactor with Lead Coolant. Proc. of the XXI4st Scientific School of Young Scientists of the Nuclear Safety Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences. Moscow. IBRAE RAN Publ., 2022, pp. 119-122 (in Russian).
4. Attestation Certificate of the Computer Program «CORNER». Reg. No 499 from Dec. 14.12.2020. Moscow. Scientific and Engineering Center for Nuclear and Radiation Safety. Available at: https://docs.secnrs.ru/catalog/databases/Baza_attestatsionnykh_pasportov_programm_dlya_EVM/ (accessed Oct. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
5. Alekseev N.I., Kalugin M.A., Kulakov A.S., Oleinik D.S., Shkarovsky D.A. MCU-FR Verification for Fast Nuclear Reactors Criticality Calculations. VANT. Ser. Fizika Yadernykh Rektorov. 2016, iss. 5, pp. 22-26 (in Russian).
6. Attestation Certificate of the Computer Program «A Program Designed to Simulate the Processes of Neutron, Photon and Electron Transport by Analog and Weight Monte Carlo Methods Based on Estimated Nuclear Data in Systems with Three-Dimensional Geometry. Version 1.0» (MCU-FR with Data Bank MDBFR60). Reg. No 501 from 14.12.2020. Moscow. Scientific and Engineering Center for Nuclear and Radiation Safety. Available at: https://docs.secnrs.ru/catalog/databases/Baza_attestatsionnykh_pasportov_programm_dlya_EVM/ (accessed Oct. 20, 2022) (in Russian).
7. Bol’shov L.A., Mosunova N.A., Strizhov V.F., Shmidt O.V. Next Generation Design Codes for a New Technological Platform for Nuclear Power. Atomic Energy. 2016, v. 120, pp. 369-379; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0145-4 .
8. Adamov E. O., Aleksakhin R.M., Bol’shov L.A., Dedul A.V., Orlov V.V., Pershukov V.A., Rachkov V.I., Tolstoukhov D.A., Troyanov V.M. Project «Proryv» – a Technological Foundation for Large-Scale Nuclear Energy. Izvestiya RAN. Energetika. 2015, no. 1. pp. 5-13 (in Russian).
9. Bereznev V.P., Chernova I.S. A Non-Stationary Version of the Neutron-Physical CORNER Code. VANT. Ser.Fizika Yadernykh Reactorov. 2018, no. 3, pp. 40-45 (in Russian).
10. Koshcheev V.N., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Tsibulya A.M. ABBN-RF Group Constants Library for Nuclear Reactor and Shielding Calculations. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2014, no. 3, pp. 93-101; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2014.3.10 (in Russian).
11. Koshcheev V.N., Lomakov G.B., Manturov G.N., Nikolaev M.N., Semenov M.Yu., Tsibulya A.M. Certificate of State Registration of the Computer Program No 2016612865 Russian Federation. CONSYST-RF: No 2016610022: Appl. Jan. 01, 2016: Publ. Mar. 03, 2016. Applicant «State Scientific Centre of the Russian Federation – Leypunsky Institute for Physics and Power Engineering, Joint-Stock Company» – EDN GSYMUB.
12. Zabrodskaya S.V., Ignatyuk A.V., Koshcheev V.N., Manokhin V.N., Nikolaev M.N., Pronyaev V.G. ROSFOND – Russian National Library of Neutron Data. VANT. Ser. Yaderno4 Reaktornye Konstanty. 2007, iss. 1-2, pp. 3-21 (in Russian).