+++

categories="article"
date="2023-03-28T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2023-01"
issue_name="2023 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2023/01/13.pdf"
first_page="153"
last_page="161"
udc="621.039.51"
title="Verification of the Possibility to Use the Variational Method for Estimating Nuclear Concentration Uncertanties in a Burnup Problem"
original_title="Проверка возможности использования вариационного метода для оценки погрешностей ядерных концентраций в задаче выгорания"
authors=["KolesovVV", "PisarevAN"]
tags=["fuel burnup", "nuclear concentrations", "nuclear concentration uncertainties", "variational method"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2023.1.13"

+++

Since the 1990s, various fuel burnup calculation systems have been developed that combine the program code for solving the neutron transport equation and the program code for burnup. These numerical methods are acceptable for calculating the isotopic composition of the fuel. However, to ensure the reliability of the results, it is currently necessary that the results of reactor calculations using program codes be accompanie by an assessment of all error components, since this directly affects the efficiency, economy and safety of the designed reactor plant. At present, much attention is paid to assessing the impact of uncertainties in nuclear data on the parameters of various reactor facilities. However, the influence of uncertainties in nuclear data on the main parameters (keff, reaction rates, etc.) is mainly studied using sensitivity coefficients. The transfer of errors in the input parameters of the fuel burnup problem (neutron flux density, reaction rates, etc.) to the nuclear concentrations obtained in the course of calculations was studied in a number of works. In the proposed work, for a model problem that makes it possible to obtain an analytical solution to the problem of fuel burnup, comparative calculations of nuclear concentrations and their errors, due to the error in the neutron flux density and capture reaction cross sections for 240Pu, were carried out using the analytical approach and the variational method (1% sensitivity method). There is excellent agreement between the results obtained with both methods. Also, the dependence of the error of nuclear concentrations on the number of burnup steps was studied in the work.

### References

1. Takeda T., Hirokawa N., Noda T. Estimation of Error Propagation in Monte-Carlo Burnup Calculations. Nuclear Science and Technology. 1999, v. 36, no. 9, pp. 738-745; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.1999.9726262 .
2. Tohjoh M., Endo T., Watanabe M., Yamamoto A. Effect of Error Propagation of Nuclide Number Densities on Monte Carlo Burn-Up Calculations. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2006, v. 33, no. 17-18, pp. 1424-1436; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2006.09.010 .
3. Garcia-Herranz N., Cabellos O., Sanz J., Juan J., Kuijper J.C. Propagation of Statistical and Nuclear Data Uncertainties in Monte Carlo Burn-Up Calculations. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2008, v. 35, no. 4, pp. 714-730; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2007.07.022 .
4. Park H.J., Shim H.J., Kim C.H. Uncertainty Propagation in Monte Carlo Depletion Analysis. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 2011, v. 167, no. 3, pp. 196-208; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NSE09-106 .
5. Rochman D., Koning A.J., da Cruz D.F. Propagation of 235,236,238U and 239Pu Nuclear Data Uncertainties for a Typical PWR Fuel Element. Nuclear Technology. 2012, v. 179, no. 3, pp. 323-338; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT11-61 .
6. Newell Q., Sanders C. Stochastic Uncertainty Propagation in Monte Carlo Depletion Calculations. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 2015, v. 179, no. 3, pp. 253-263; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NSE13-44 .
7. Minamigawa Y., Kitcher E.D., Chirayath S.S. A Method to Estimate Fission Product Concentration Uncertainty in a Multi-Time-Step MCNP6 Code Nuclear Fuel Burnup Calculation. Nuclear Technology. 2019; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2019.1624429 .
8. Pisarev A.N., Kolesov V.V. A Study into the Propagation of the Uncertainties in Nuclear Data to the Nuclear Concentrations of Nuclides in Burn-Up Calculations. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 2, pp. 108-121; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.10 (in Russian).
9. Kolesov V.V., Novichkov A.V., Voznyakevich E.E., Terehova A.M. Statistical Approach to Estimated Uncertainty of Nuclear Concentration in Problems of Isotope Kinetics. Proc. of the XIII-th International Youth Scientific and Practical Conference «FUTURE OF ATOMIC ENERGY AtomFuture 2017». KnE Engineering. 2017, pp. 261-267; DOI: https://doi.org/10.18502/keg.v3i3.1625 .
10. Kolesov V.V., Khitrik D.V., Kamaev D.A. VisualBurnOut Program. Certificate of State Registration of the Computer Program No. 2009617021. Registered in the Register of Computer Programs on Dec. 9, 2009 (in Russian).
11. Kitcher E.D., Osborn J.M., Chirayath S.S. Sensitivity Studies on a Novel Nuclear Forensics Methodology for Source Reactor-Type Discrimination of Separated Weapons Grade Plutonium. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2019, v. 51, iss. 5, pp. 1355-1364, ISSN 1738-5733; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.02.019 .
12. Osborn J.M., Kitcher E.D., Burns J.D., Folden C.M. III & Chirayath S.S. Nuclear Forensics Methodology for Reactor-Type Attribution of Chemically Separated Plutonium. Nuclear Technology. 2018, v. 201:1, pp. 1-10; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1401442 .
13. Osborn J.M., Glennon K.J., Kitcher E.D., Burns J.D., Folden C.M., Chirayath S.S. Experimental Validation of a Nuclear Forensics Methodology for Source Reactor-Type Discrimination of Chemically Separated Plutonium. Nuclear Engineering and Technology. 2019, v. 51, iss. 2, pp. 384-393, ISSN 1738-5733; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2018.11.003 .
14. Swinney M.W., Folden C.M. III, Ellis R.J. & Chirayath S.S. Experimental and Computational Forensics Characterization of Weapons-Grade Plutonium Produced in a Fast Reactor Neutron Environment. Nuclear Technology. 2017, v. 197:1, pp. 1-11; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT16-76 .
15. Chirayath S.S., Osborn J.M. & Coles T.M. Trace Fission Product Ratios for Nuclear Forensics Attribution of Weapons-Grade Plutonium from Fast and Thermal Reactors. Science & Global Security. 2015, v. 23:1, pp. 48-67; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08929882.2015.996079 .
16. Sagadevan A., Chirayath S. Information Driven Safeguards Approach for Remote Monitoring System of Dry Cask Storage. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment. 2020, v. 954, 161737, ISSN 0168-9002; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2018.12.052 .