+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="14"
udc="621.039.003"
title="The Development Options of Nuclear Power Under Carbon Dioxide Emissions Constrains"
original_title="Варианты развития ядерной энергетики при ограничениях эмиссии диоксида углерода"
authors=["MarchenkoOV", "SolominSV"]
tags=["nuclear power", "nuclear power plants", "environmental constraints", "efficiency", "energy model", "forecast"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.01"

+++

The aim of the work is forecasting the development of nuclear power in Russia and the world for the period up to 2050 under various scenarios of constraints on carbon dioxide emissions. A brief comparative analysis of the main characteristics of the forecasts of the International Energy Agency (IEA) and the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has been carried out. Additionally, calculations were performed using the mathematical models of the world energy system GEM and GEM$Dyn developed at the ISEM SB RAS. The optimal ratio of nuclear and non$nuclear energy sources has been determined. It is shown that nuclear power, including nuclear power plants operating on a closed fuel cycle, along with renewable energy sources, is an effective technology that can solve the problem of reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Calculations have shown that in the sustainable development scenario, the capacity of nuclear power plants in Russia in the period from 2020 to 2050 can increase by 2.7 times, and their share in electricity generation can reach 21 – 25% in 2030 and 26 – 35% in 2050. The average annual growth rate (for 30 years) of the installed capacity of nuclear power plants in Russia in the sustainable development scenario is 3.1% compared to 2.7% for the world as a whole. In the GEM and GEM$Dyn calculations performed by the authors, the scale of nuclear energy use turned out to be about 30% higher than in the scenarios of the International Energy Agency due to more conservative estimates of the opportunities for improving the performance of renewable energy sources and taking into account the need to back$up their capacity.

### References

1. Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5°C above Pre-Industrial Levels and Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty. IPCC, 2019. 616 p.
2. Hansen K., Breyer C., Lund H. Status and perspectives on 100% renewable energy systems. Energy. 2019, vol. 175, pp. 471-480; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.03.092 .
3. Future of Solar Photovoltaic: Deployment, Investment, Technology, Grid Integration and Socio-Economic Aspects. Abu Dhabi: IRENA, 2019. 73 p.
4. Gielen D., Boshell F., Saygin D., Bazilian M., Wagner N., Gorini R. The Role of Renewable Energy in the Global Energy Transformation. Energy Strategy Reviews. 2019, v. 24, pp. 38-54; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.01.006 .
5. Belyaev L.S., Marchenko O.V., Filippov S.P. et al. World Energy and Transition to Sustainable development. Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. 264 p. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-3705-0 .
6. Murogov V.M., Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N. Nuclear Technology – Guarantee of the Stable Development Russia in the 21 Centure. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya energetika. 2005, no. 2, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
7. Zrodnikov A.V. Fast Reactors in the Energy Security for the Stable Development of Russia. Atomic Energy. 2010, v. 108, iss. 4, pp. 230-233; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-010-9282-3 .
8. Belyaev L.S., Marchenko O.V., Solomin S.V. Investigation of Long_Term Trends of Russia and World Energy Systems Development. Izvestiya RAN. Energetika. 2011, no. 2, pp. 3-11 (in Russian).
9. Adamov E.O., Dzhalavyan A.V., Lopatkin A.V., Molokanov N.A., Muravyov E.V., Orlov V.V., Kal’akin S.G., Rachkov V.I., Troyanov V.M., Avrorin E.N., Ivanov V.B., Aleksakhin R.M. Conceptual Framework of a Strategy for the Development of Nuclear Power in Russia to 2100. Atomic Energy. 2012, v. 112, iss. 6, pp. 391-403; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-012-9574-x .
10. Kagramanyan V.S., Korobeynikov V.V., Poplavskaya E.V., Belyaev L.S., Marchenko O.V., Solomin S.V. Assessment of the Economic Risk due to Delayed Startup of NPP with Fast Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2013, v. 114, iss. 2, pp. 83-93; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-013-9676-0 .
11. Marchenko O.V., Solomin S.V. Investigation of Ecological Constraints Influence on Competitiveness of Nuclear Power Plants. Izvestiya Wysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 3, pp. 20-30; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.3.02 (in Russian).
12. Adamov E.O., Rachkov V.I., Kashirsky A.A., Orlov A.I. Global Outlook on Large-Scale Nuclear Power Development Strategies. Nuclear Energy and Technology. 2021, v.7, no. 4, pp. 263-270; DOI: https://doi.org/10.3897/nucet.7.74217 .
13. World Energy Oulook 2021. Paris: IEA, 2021. 386 p.
14. Filippov S.P., Lebedev A.V. Multi-Regional Dynamic Model of the World Energy System. Irkutsk. ISEM SO RAN Publ., 2003, 74 p. (in Russian).
15. Lagerev A.V., Hanaeva V.N. Impact of Restrictions on CO2 Emissions on Innovative Development of Thermal Power. Energeticheskaya Politika. 2021, no. 7, pp. 16-25; DOI: https://doi.org/10.46920/2409-5516_2021_7161_16 (in Russian).