+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/02.pdf"
first_page="15"
last_page="26"
udc="621.039.4"
title="Experience of the Use of Detection Systems for Loose Parts and Weakly Fixed Objects in the Coolant Circulation Circuit of Novovoronezh NPP Reactor Installations"
original_title="Опыт использования систем обнаружения свободных и слабозакреплённых предметов в контуре циркуляции теплоносителя реакторных установок Нововоронежской АЭС"
authors=["VoronovAV", "SlepovMT"]
tags=["VVER-440", "VVER-1200", "technical diagnostics systems", "system for detecting loose and loosely attached objects", "shock event", "neural network", "classification", "class of events", "main circulation circuit", "steam generator"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.02"

+++

The operating organization Concern Rosenergoatom JSC pays great attention to the development of stationary systems of technical diagnostics. Over the past 20 years, almost all Russian power units have been equipped with them. This contributed both to improving the safety of operation, and ensuring reliability, and extending the life of existing nuclear power plants. Complex, high-tech diagnostic systems are moving into operational practice with great difficulty and skepticism. The systems are slowly being filled with diagnostic knowledge, but our demanding foreign customer will undoubtedly require this diagnostic knowledge.

In reactor installations with VVER, the appearance of loose, loosely attached and foreign objects in the main circulation circuit is not completely excluded.

Operational experience shows that early detection and assessment of the parameters of such incidents allows timely adoption of a set of measures aimed at eliminating or minimizing damage to the main equipment of the reactor plant. For this reason, most modern power units with pressurized water reactors (PWR, VVER) are equipped with a system for detecting loose parts and weakly fixed objects. On the blocks under construction, these systems are laid down as standard, and power units already put into commercial operation are equipped with such systems. The requirements for the system for detecting loose and weakly fixed objects are established by international standards. The research works in this field are aimed at determining the root cause of the acoustic anomaly and localization of its epicenter. Also, no less significant are the works aimed at determining the mass of a free object (FO). The most accurate definition of this parameter will allow you to get an idea of the possible nature of the FO before it is removed from the primary circuit and make a conclusion about whether this item is accidentally hit, or it is a detached part of steam generators, main circulation pumps, internal devices or shut-off and control valves.

### References

1. Arkadov G.V., Pavelko V.I., Finkel B.M. VVER Diagnostic Systems. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 2019, 391 p. ISBN 978-5-02-040184-6 (in Russian).
2. Accidents and Incidents at Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook. Ed. Professor S.P. Solovyov. Obninsk. IATE, 1992, 300 p. (in Russian).
3. Regulatory Guide 1.133. Loose Part Detection Program for the Primary System of Light Water Cooled Reactors: Tech. Rep. – U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1981, 6 p.
4. Operation and Maintenance of Nuclear Power Plants. Part 12. Loose Part Monitoring. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), 2015, 523 p.
5. IEC 60988. Nuclear Power Plants. Instrumentation Important to Safety. Acoustic Monitoring Systems for Detection of Loose Parts: Characteristics, Design Criteria and Operational Procedures. 2009, 75 p.
6. GOST R ISO 13379-1-2015. Condition Monitoring and Diagnostics of Machines. Methods of Data Interpretation and Diagnostics. General Guidance. Part 1. Moscow. Standartinform Publ., 2015, 33 p. (in Russian).
7. Olma B. Source Location and Mass Estimation in Loose Parts Monitoring of LWR. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 1985, v. 15, pp. 583-594; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0149-1970(85)90086-1 .
8. Szappanos G. et al. Analysis of Measurements Made by HELPS Loose Part Detection System During Installation and Operation Periods. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 1999, v. 34, no. 3, pp. 185-193. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-1970(98)00004-3 .
9. Kim J.S. et al. Development of Automatic Algorithm for Localizing Loose Parts with a Steam Generator. Nuclear Engineering and Design. 2003, v. 219, no. 3, pp. 269-276. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0029-5493(02)00281-9 .
10. Choi Y.C., Park J.H., Choi K.S. An impact Source Localization Technique for a Nuclear Power Plant by Using Sensors of Different Types. ISA Transactions. 2011, v. 50, no. 1, pp. 111-118; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isatra.2010.08.004 .
11. Park J.H., Kim Y.H. Impact Source Localization on an Elastic Plate in a Noisy Environment. Measurement Science and Technology. 2006, v. 17, no. 10, pp. 2757-2766; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/17/10/030 .
12. Park G.Y. et al. An Estimation Method for Impact Location of Loose Parts. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2006, v. 48, no. 4, pp. 360-370; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2005.09.012 .
13. Ki H.I., Seong In M., Soon Woo H. ANN Based Localization of Metal Ball Impacts on Reactor Pressure Boundary Structure. Transactions of the Korean Nuclear SocietyAutumn Meeting Gyeongju, Korea, October 26!27, 2017, 3 p. 
14. Figedy S., Oksa G. Modern Methods of Signal Processing in the Loose Part Monitoring System. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2005, v. 46 (3-4), pp. 253-267; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2005.03.008 .
15. Liska J., Kunkel S. Localization of Loose Part Impacts on the General 3D Surface of the Nuclear Power Plant Coolant Circuit Components. Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2017. v. 99, pp. 140-146; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.05.004 .
16. Haikin Simon. Neural Networks: a Complete Course, 2nd edition. Transl. from English. Moscow. Williams Publishing House, 2006, 104 p. (in Russian)
17. Golovko V.A. Neural Networks: Training, Organization and Application. Book 4: Studies. Manual for universities. Ed. A.I. Galushkin. Moscow. IPRZhR Publ., 2001, 256 p. (in Russian).
18. Zheng H., Cao Y., Yang J. A Method for Estimating Impact Location of Loose Part Using HHT. Proc. SPIE 7130. Fourth International Symposium on Precision Mechanical Measurements. 71304S (31 December 2008), 6 p.; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.819732 .
19. Page E.S. Cumulative Sum Charts. Technometrics. 1961, v. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1961.10489922 .
20. Maksimov I.V., Pavelko V.I., Perevezentsev V.V., Trykov E.L. Method of isolating a useful signal for a system for detecting loose, weakly secured and third-party objects in the main circulation circuit of a reactor installation with a water-water power reactor. Vestnik MGTU im. Baumana. Ser.: Priborostroenie. 2018, no. 1, pp. 4-15; DOI: https://doi.org/10.18698/0236-3933-2018-1-4-15 .
21. Maksimov I.V., Perevezentsev V.V. Impact Localization Method for the System of Free Objects in the Coolant Circulation Circuit of Reactor Installations with VVER. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 4, pp. 28-38; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.4.02 (in Russian).
22. Truong C., Oudre L., Vayatis N. Selective Review of Offline Change Point Detection Method. Available at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.00718 (accessed Nov. 10, 2021).
23. Lavielle M. Using Penalized Contrasts for the Changepoint Problem. Signal Processing. 2005, v. 85, no. 8, pp. 1501-1510; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sigpro.2005.01.012 .
24. Dijkstra E.W. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs. Numerische Mathematik. 1959, v. 1, no. 1, pp. 269-271; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01386390 .