+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:21:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="03"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/03.pdf"
first_page="27"
last_page="36"
udc="621.039"
title="Computational and Experimental Justification of Increasing the Efficiency of the Regenerative Heat Exchanger of the Steam Generator Purge System of the NPP-2006 Project (RU V-392M)"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальное обоснование повышения эффективности регенеративного теплообменника системы продувки парогенераторов проекта АЭС-2006 (РУ В-392М)"
authors=["YaurovSV", "BorovoyAV", "YudinAV", "BolgovMV", "DanilovAD"]
tags=["AES-2006", "purge", "steam generator", "modernization", "regenerative heat exchanger", "strapping", "re-routing", "RU V-392M", "operation"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.03"

+++

The design and operating modes of the regenerative heat exchanger (RHE) of the purge and drainage system of steam generators of power units No. 1, 2 of Novovoronezh NPP-2 (AES-2006 project) are considered.

The results of mathematical modeling of the operating modes of the heat exchanger in order to identify the causes of low efficiency are presented.

Based on the results of the commissioning of the purge and drainage system of the steam generators of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 unit No. 1, as well as the thermohydraulic calculations of the RHE operating modes, the authors of the article put forward assumptions regarding changes in the re-routing of the strapping pipelines [1 – 3]. At unit No. 2 of Novovoronezh NPP-2, the RHE binding was upgraded according to the proposals of the authors of the article.

The modernization in the RHE binding was implemented first at unit No. 2 at the installation stage of the systems, and after confirming the expected result, it was applied in April 2020 at unit No. 1 of Novovoronezh NPP-2.

A comparative analysis of the test results of the thermohydraulic characteristics of regenerative heat exchangers of the purge and drainage system for unit No. 1 (before modernization, after modernization in 2020) and unit No. 2 of Novovoronezh NPP-2 is presented.

These improvements made it possible to achieve a more efficient RHE of the purge and drainage system of steam generators and the system as a whole.

### References

1. .Yaurov S.V., Galiev K.F., Borovoy A.V., Volnov A.S. Experience of Commissioning the AES-2006 Design (V-392M Reactor Plant) Steam Generator Blowdown System. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 151-161; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.14 (in Russian).
2. Volnov A.S., Borovoy A.V., Goncharov E.V., Yaurov S.V. Commissioning of the Steam Generator Purge System of the NPP-2006 Project (RU V-392M). Upgrade Proposals. Proc. of the XIII-th International Scientific and Practical Conference on Nuclear Energy. Sevastopol. Sevastopol’sky Gosudatstvenny Universitet Publ., 2017, pp. 56-57 (in Russian).
3. Yaurov S.V., Borovoy A.V., Danilov A.D. Mathematical Modeling of Hydraulic Processes in the Collector Scheme of Connection of Pipelines of the Steam Generator Purge System of the Novovoronezh NPP-2 Power Unit No. 1. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2021, no. 3, pp. 134-145; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2021.3.11 (in Russian).
4. RB-002-16. Safety Guide in the Area of Atomic Energy Use. Water-Chemical Regime of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. NTC YaRB FBU Publ., 2016, 13 p. (in Russian).
5. Shchelik S.V., Shestakov N.B., Bogomolov I.N. Selection and Optimization of the Purge Mode of the Kalinin NPP Steam Generators. In Proc. of the OKB Gidropress JSC 2006. Podolsk. OKB Gidropress JSC Publ., 2006, pp. 37-45 (in Russian).
6. Lukasevich B.I., Trunov N.B., Dragunov Yu.G., Davidenko S.E. Steam Generators of VVER Reactor Installations for Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. IKTs Akademkniga Publ., 2004, 391 p. (in Russian).
7. Zhukov A.G., Lukashov Yu.Yu. Progressive Concepts of Optimization of Technological Systems for Purging Steam Generators of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER-1000. Izvestiya vuzov. Severo-Kavkazsky Region. Tekhnicheskie Nauki. 2010, no. 1, pp. 51-54 (in Russian).
8. Rassokhin N.G. Steam Generator Sets of Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook for Universities. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 384 p. (in Russian).
9. Margulova T.Kh. Nuclear Power Plants. Textbook for Universities. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 1994, 288 p. (in Russian).
10. Trunov N.B., Logvinov S.A., Dragunov Yu.G. Hydrodynamic and Thermochemical Processes in Steam Generators of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 2001. 318 p. (in Russian).
11. Andrushechko S.A., Afrov A.M., Vasilyev B.Y., Generalov V.N., Kosourov K.V., Semchenkov Yu.M., Ukraintsev V.F. NPP with VVER21000 Type Reactor. From Physical Basics of Exploitation to Evolution Design. Moscow. Logos Publ., 2010, 604 p. (in Russian).
12. Bruyaka V.A., Fokin V.G., Soldusova E.A., Glazunova N.A., Adeyanov I.E. Engineering Analysis in Ansys Workbench. Samara. Samarsky Gosudatstvenny Tekhnichesky Universitet Publ., 2010, 271 p. (in Russian).
13. Snegirev A.Yu. High-Performance Computing in Technical Physics. Numerical Modeling of Turbulent flows: Textbook. St.Petersburg. SPbPU Publ., 2009, 143 p. (in Russian).