+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/04.pdf"
first_page="37"
last_page="48"
udc="621.039.586"
title="Investigation of Algorithms for Suppressing Xenon Oscillations in a VVER-1200 Reactor"
original_title="Исследование алгоритмов подавления ксеноновых колебаний в реакторе ВВЭР-1200"
authors=["SolovievDA", "KhachatryanAG", "ChernovEV", "AlMalkawiRT"]
tags=["VVER-1200", "offset-phase diagram", "axial offset (AO)", "automatic power regulator (APR)", "suppression algorithm", "xenon oscillations", "water exchange"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.04"

+++

This paper presents the results of numerical studies of various algorithms for suppression of xenon offset and power distribution oscillations in the core of a VVER-1200 reactor. The purpose of the research is to select an algorithm that minimizes the amount of liquid radioactive wastes during water exchange in the primary circuit of a nuclear power plant. For this, several algorithms for xenon oscillations suppression were considered.

The first algorithm considered was an algorithm for suppression of xenon oscillations, which uses regulation due to AWP only, without utilizationof any additional regulation.

The second algorithm considered was an algorithm based on the use both AWP and boron regulation. In this algorithm suppression of xenon oscillations was carried out with the help of accelerated initiation of the work of the AWP by changing the boric acid concentration with constant second circuit pressureof the NPP and by utilization of the second control rods group.

Last algorithm considered was algorithm based on the use of temperature control for accelerated initiation of the work of the AWP. In this algorithm, xenon oscillations suppression was carried out by changing coolant temperature at the reactor inlet caused by pressure change in the secondarycircuit in the normal operation margins, and by involving the second groupof control rods.

It was shown that the best way to suppress xenon offset and power distribution oscillations in terms of minimization of radioactive liquid wastes amount is the algorithm with accelerated initiation of the AWP due to temperature regulation, with elimination of temperature regulation after minimizing ofcurrent axial offset value deviation from the nominal one.

### References

1. Vygovskij S.B., Al’ Malkavi R.T., Khachatryan A.G., Abrahamyan Sh.A. Optimization of control algorithms for NPP with VVER-1200 to minimize water exchange in the 1st loop when implementing daily maneuvering modes. Global’naya Yadernaya Bezopasnost’. 2018, no. 3(28), pp. 49-63; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/gns-2018-03-07 (in Russian).
2. Rashdan A.T. Optimization of Control Algorithms for the Spatial Distribution of Neutron Fields in the Core of VVER41000 (1200) Reactors Under Conditions of Maneuvering Modes. Dr. Sci. (Tech.) Diss. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2018, 216 p. (in Russian)
3. Vygovskij S.B., Al’ Malkavi R.T., Khachatryan A.G. Study of Control Algorithms for NPP with VVER-1200 for the Implementation of daily Maneuvering Modes at NPP. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 02, pp. 67-79; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.2.06 (in Russian).
4. Semenov V.K., Vol’man M.A. On the Issue of Xenon Oscillations in a Nuclear Reactor. Vestnik Ivanovskogo Gosudarstvennogo Energeticheskogo Universiteta. 2015, v. 2, pp. 15-20; DOI: https://doi.org/10.17588/2072-2672.2015.2.015-020 (in Russian).
5. Aver’yanova S.P., Filimonov P.E. Xenon Resistance of VVER-1200. Atomnaya Energiya. 2009, v. 107, iss. 6, pp. 348-351; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-010-9246-7 (in Russian).
6. Shimazu Y. Xenon Oscillation Control in Large PWRs Using a Characteristics Ellipse Trajectory Drawn Three Axials Offsets. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology. 2008, v. 45. no. 4, pp. 257-262; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2008.9711435 .
7. Aver’janova S. P., Dubov A. A., Kosourov K. B., Semchenkov Ju. M., Filimonov P. E. Development of Control Methods for VVER-1200/1300 in the Daily Load Schedule. Atomnaya Energiya. 2013, v. 114, iss. 5, pp. 249-253 (in Russian).
8. Vygovskij S.B., Rjabov N.O., Chernov E.V. Safety and Tasks of Engineering Support for the Operation of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2013, 304 p. (in Russian).
9. Vygovskij S.B., Rjabov N.O., Semenov A.A., Chernov E. V, Bogachek L.N. Physical and Structural Features of Nuclear Power Plants with VVER. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2011, 376 p. (in Russian).
10. Filimonov P.E. VVER Power Distribution Control Using Offset-Offset Diagram. Atomnaya Energiya. 1992, v. 73, iss. 3, pp. 175-179; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00761621 (in Russian).
11. Aver’yanova S.P., Vohmyanina N.S., Zlobin D.A., Filimonov P.E., Kuznecov V.I., Lagovskij V.B. The Method of the Offset-Power Phase Diagram for Controlling the Power Release of Reactor. Atomnaya Energiya. 2016, v. 121, iss. 3, pp. 123-127; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0176-5 (in Russian).
12. Aver’yanova S.P., Lunin G.L., Proselkov V.N. et al. Control of the Local Linear Power of Fuel Elements in the VVER-1000 Core Using an Offset-Power Diagram. Atomnaya Energiya. 2002, v. 93, iss. 1, pp. 13-18 (in Russian).
13. Averyanova S.P., Dubov A.A., Filimonov P.E. Integral and Axial Xenon Oscillations Superposition and VVER-1000 Core Energy-Release Stability. Atomic Energy. 2011, v. 111, iss. 1, pp. 8-14; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-011-9446-9 .
14. Aver’yanova S.P., Kosourov K.B., Semchenkov Yu. M. Investigation of Xenon Transient Processes in VVER-1000 at the Tianwan NPP (China). Atomnaya Energiya. 2008, v. 105, iss. 4, pp. 183-190; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-009-9091-8 (in Russian).
15. Vygovskij S.B., Zimin V.G. Chernov E.V. Supplement to the Attestation Passport No. 182 dated 28.10.2004. Program Complex PROSTOR (Version 1). Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2004, – 8 p. (in Russian).
16. Vygovskij S.B. et al. Experience of Using the Software Package PROSTOR in the Computational Support of the Operation of Kln NPP and the Prospects for its Further Application at NPPs with VVER-1000. Proc. of the XIV Annual Conference of Russian Nuclear Society «Nauchnoe Obespechenie Bezopasnogo Ispol’zovaniya Yadernykh Energeticheskikh Tekhnologij», 2003, pp. 121-123 (in Russian).
17. Aver’yanova S.P., Dubov A.A., Kosourov K.B., Filimonov P.E. Temperature Regulation and Maneuverability of VVER-1000. Atomnaya Energiya, 2010, v. 109, iss. 4, pp. 199-202; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-011-9352-1 (in Russian).
18. Filimonov P.E., Aver’yanova S.P., Filimonova M.P. Management of CPS Working Bodies Groups in the Maneuverable Operating Mode of VVER-1000. Atomnaya Energiya. 1998, v. 84, iss. 5, pp. 382-393; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02414876 (in Russian).
19. Kazanskij Yu.A., Slekenichs Ya.V. Power coefficient of reactivity: determination, relationship with reactivity coefficients, evaluation of the results of transient processes of power reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2018, no. 1, pp. 63-74; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2018.1.07 (in Russian)
20. Braslavskij Yu.V., Merzlikin G.Ya., Sukrushev A.V., Shapovalenko V.V. Analysis of the Causes of the Occurrence of Xenon Oscillations of the Local Power in the VVER Core and the Mechanisms of their Suppression. Energeticheskie Ustanovki i Tekhnologii. 2018, v. 4, no. 1, pp. 7-18 (in Russian).