+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/05.pdf"
first_page="49"
last_page="61"
udc="536.24+621.039.553.34"
title="Thermophysical Studies of Alkaline Liquid Metal Coolants. Izvestiya vuzov"
original_title="Теплогидравлические исследования щелочных жидкометаллических теплоносителей в обоснование ядерных энергетических установок"
authors=["KuzinaJuA", "SorokinAP", "DelnovVN", "DenisovaNA", "SorokinGA"]
tags=["alkali liquid metals", "fast reactors", "thermonuclear reactors", "experiment", "designcodes", "data bases", "thermal hydraulics", "safety", "core", "reactor vessel", "steam generator", "emergency situations", "velocity", "pressure", "temperature"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.05"

+++

As a result of the alkaline liquid-metal coolants development: sodium, eutectic alloys of sodium-potassium, lithium, cesium, together with the industry institutes, the Academy of Sciences and design bureaus carrying out the development of nuclear power plants, the scientific basis for their application in nuclear energy were development, the thermohydraulic parameters and highly efficient technologies were scientific substantiated. The main research areas were: a hydrodynamics and heat transfer in the core and equipment of fast reactor, in flow parts of collector systems of heat exchangers and reactors; a boiling and condensation processes, a analysis and generalization of thermophysical data, a creation of a database, a heat pipes, a thermal physics of thermionic converters, high temperature nuclear power plants for space purposes and thermonuclear installations. The tasks of further research arising from the need to improve safety, efficiency, environmental friendliness, reliability and prolongation of the resource of operating and created nuclear power plants are formulated, the solution of which is relevant for the development of liquid-metal technology. The use of liquid alkali metals is promising in high-temperature nuclear power plants for technological and space purposes and in thermonuclear installations, where they can be not only a heat carrier, but also a medium that reproduces tritium.

### References

1. Efanov A.D., Kozlov F.A., Rachkov V.I., Sorokin A.P., Chernonog V.L. Scientific School of the SSC RF – IPPE «Heat and Mass Transfer, Physical Chemistry and Technology of Coolants in Power Systems». In Scientific and Technical Collection «Results of Scientific and Technical Activities of the Institute of Nuclear Reactors and Thermal Physics in 2014». Ed. A.P. Sorokin, A.A. Trufanova, T.N. Vereshchagina. Obninsk. SSC RF – IPPE Publ., 2015, pp. 24-51 (in Russian).
2. Thermophysical Stand Base of the Nuclear Power Industry in Russia and Kazakhstan. Ed. Pershukov V.A., Arkhangelsky A.V., Kononov O.E., Sorokin A.P. Sarov. RFYaTs – VNIIEF Publ., 2016, 160 p. (in Russian).
3. Rachkov V.I., Arnol’dov M.N., Efanov A.D., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Loginov N.I., Orlov Y.I., Sorokin A.P. Using of Liquid Metals in Nuclear and Thermonuclear Engineering and in other Innovative Technologies. Teploenergetika. 2014, v. 61, no. 5, pp. 337-347; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601514050085 (in Russian).
4. Ponomarev-Stepnoi N.N. Two-Component Nuclear Power System with a Closed Nuclear Fuel Cycle Based on BN and VVER Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2016, v. 120, iss. 4, pp. 233-239; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0123-x .
5. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A., Denisova N.A. Hydrodynamics of Turbulent Flow in a Fast Reactor Fuel Assemblies (Velocity Field and Microstructure of Turbulence). VANT. Ser. Yaderno/Reaktornye Konstany. 2021, iss. 2, pp. 139-166. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/en/year2021/2/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/2020-10.html (accessed Dec. 05, 2021); DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2021-2-139-166 (in Russian).
6. Rachkov V.I., Sorokin A.P., Zhukov A.V. Thermal Hydraulic Studies of Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Power Plants. Teplofizika Vysokikh Temperatur. 2018, v. 56, no. 1, pp. 121-136; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0018151X18010145 (in Russian).
7. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A. Physical Modeling of Hydrodynamic and Heat Transfer Process in NPP with Liquid Metal Cooling. Teploenergetika. 2019, no. 8, pp. 1-9; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040363619080095 (in Russian).
8. Zhukov A.V., Sorokin A.P., Matyukhin N.M. Interchannel Exchange in Fuel Assemblies of Fast Reactors (Calculation Programs and Practical Application). Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1991, 224 p. (in Russian).
9. Gabrianovich B.N., Delnov V.N. Features of Hydrodynamics of Flow Parts of Collector Systems of Heat Exchangers and Reactors of Nuclear Power Plants. Sarov. RFYaTs – VNIIEF Publ., 2016, 216 p. (in Russian).
10. Delnov V.N., Gabrianovich B.N., Yuriev Yu.S. Application for Discovery: No. 70 from 17.04.2019. Discovery Priority: 26.11.2012. Diploma for the Discovery of MAANOiI No. 518. Regularity of Liquid Distribution at the Outlet from the Flow Parts of Distributing Collector Systems (in Russian).
11. Delnov V.N. Application for Discovery: No. A-678 from 25.02.2021. Discovery Priority: 2018. Diploma for the Discovery of MAANOiI No. 524. The Phenomenon of the Emergence of Hydrodynamic Identity in Distributing Collector Systems (in Russian).
12. Opanasenko A.N., Sorokin A.P., Trufanov A.A., Denisova N.A., Sviridov E.V., Razuvanov N.G., Zagorsky V.G., Belyaev I.A. Experimental Studies of Coolant Temperature and Velocity on an Integrated Water Model of a Fast Reactor in Different Operating Modes. Atomic Energy. 2017, v. 123, iss. 1, pp. 21-27. Available at: https://www.j-atomicenergy.ru/index.php/ae/article/view/550/529 (accessed Dec. 05, 2021).
13. Grabezhnaya, V.A., Mikheev, A.S. Experience in Experimental Validation of the Steam Generators Used in NPP with Fast Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2015, v. 119, iss. 2, pp. 106-116; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-015-0036-0 .
14. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A. & Ivanov E.F. Characteristics of Heat Transfer During Boiling of Liquid Metal in the Fuel Assemblies of Fast Reactors in Emergency Regimes. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 126, iss. 2, pp. 73-82; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00518-0 .
15. Sorokin A.P., Kuzina Yu.A., Ivanov E.F. Heat Transfer During Boiling of Liquid Metal Coolants in Fuel Assemblies of Fast Reactors in Emergency Modes. VANT. Ser. Yaderno-Reaktornye Konstany. 2018, iss. 3, pp. 176-194. Available at: https://vant.ippe.ru/year2018/3/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/1548-17.html (in Russian) or https://vant.ippe.ru/en/year2018/3/thermal-physics-hydrodynamics/1527-17.html (English version) (accessed Dec. 05, 2021).
16. Sorokin A.P., Ivanov E.F., Kuzina Yu.A., Denisova N.A., Nizovtsev A.A., Privezentsev V.V., Sorokin G.A. Experimental and Numerical Investigations into Heat Exchange and Stability of Circulation during Liquid Metals’ Boiling in Assemblies of Fast Neutron Reactors in Accident Regimes. Teploenergetika. 2021, v. 68, no. 10, pp. 752-762; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040601521090093 (in Russian).
17. Kirillov P.L., Bobkov V.P., Zhukov A.V., Yuriev Yu.S. Handbook of Thermohydraulic Calculations in Nuclear Power Engineering. V. 1. Moscow. IzdAT Publ., 2010, 770 p. (in Russian).