+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:18:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/06.pdf"
first_page="62"
last_page="72"
udc="621.039"
title="Computational and Experimental Studies of Hydrodynamic Operating Conditions of Filter Containers for Ion-Selective Purification"
original_title="Расчетно-экспериментальные исследования гидродинамических условий работы фильтров-контейнеров для ионоселективной очистки"
authors=["TashlykovOL", "BessonovIA", "LezovAD", "ChelpanovSV", "SmykovMS", "SkvortsovGI", "KlimovaVA"]
tags=["decommissioning", "liquid radioactive waste", "ion-selective treatment", "sorbents", "filter container", "optimization of radiation protection", "hydraulic resistance", "porosity", "computer simulation"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.06"

+++

The generation of radioactive waste (RW) is a specific feature of NPP operation. Liquid radioactive waste (LRW) is generated during the operation of reactor facilities, decontamination of equipment, premises and overalls. The main radionuclides in the distillation residues are 134,137Cs in the form of ions and isotopes 60Co, 54Mn in the form of complexons with substances that are used to decontaminate equipment. Among the known methods of conditioning, the largest reduction in the volume of LRW occurs with selective sorption. It is possible to increase the efficiency of using the volume of the filtering material by supplying the medium to be purified simultaneously into several layers of the sorbent. In the work, computer simulation of three proposed variants of improved designs of the filter container for ion-selective purification was carried out, which differ both in the ways of separating the flows of purified water and in the methods of their supply to the sorbent layers. All versions of the filter containers had the same cross-sectional area and height of the sorbent layers. Evaluation of the increase in the efficiency of sorption processes in the proposed designs was carried out using computer simulation in SolidWorks Flow Simulation.

Three sorbents of NPP Eksorb were used. To determine the hydraulic resistance of the samples under study, a series of experimental studies of the flow through the sorbent layer was carried out. Experiments have shown that the hydraulic resistance of the layer increases in a quadratic dependence on the flow velocity, which is consistent with the Ergun equation.

The obtained experimental data was added to the SolidWorks Flow Simulation engineering database to simulate the previously presented structures. Based on the simulation results, the characteristic parameters of the flow in the cavity of the filter containers were obtained. Modeling showed that, in all variants, the flow rate of the medium was distributed approximately equally among the layers. It was revealed that the third design option has the least hydraulic resistance. The chemical interaction of the filtered medium with the sorbent was not considered in the calculations.

### References

1. Novikov G.А., Tashlykov О.L., Scheklein S.Е. Ensuring Safety in the Field of Nuclear Energy Use. Ekaterinburg. UrFU Publ., 2017, 552 p. (in Russian).
2. Tashlykov O.L., Khomyakov A.P., Mordanov SV., Remez V.P. Ion-Selective Treatment as a Method for Increasing the Efficiency of Liquid Radioactive Waste Reducing in Accordance with Acceptance Criteria for Disposal. AIP Conf. Proc. 2021, 2388(1):020032. DOII: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0068413 .
3. Adamovich D.V., Valov D.A., Zinin A.V., Matveev A.A. Modern Approaches to RW Processing and Conditioning Complexes for Newly Constructed Nuclear Power Plants. Proc. of the XI-th Intern. Conf. «Safety, Effectivity and Economics of Nuclear Power». Moscow. Kontsern Rosenergoatov JSC, 2018, pp. 276-279 (in Russian).
4. Tashlykov O.L., Kuznezov A.G., Arefjev O.N. Operation and Repair of Nuclear Steam Generating Plants of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1995. Part 1, 256 p. (in Russian).
5. Nosov Yu.V., Rovneiko A.V. , Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E. Decommissioning Features of BN-350, -600 Fast Reactors. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 125, iss. 4, pp. 219-223. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00470-z .
6. Kropachev Yu.А., Tashlykov O. L., Scheklein S. Е. Optimization of radiation protection at the stage of decommissioning of NPP power units. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 1, pp.119-130; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.11 (in Russian).
7. Аrustamov А.E., Savkin A.E., Zinin A.V. Method of Ion-Selective Purification of Liquid Radioactive Waste of Nuclear Power Plants. Bezopasnost’ Zhiznideyatelnosti. 2005, no. 11, pp. 13-16 (in Russian).
8. Remez V.P., Tashlykov O. L., Scheklein S. Е., Ioshin А.А., Kuznetsov S.B. Improving the Efficiency of Localization of Cobalt-60 and Cesium-137 Radionuclides from Liquid Radioactive Waste in Solving the Problem of Ensuring Nuclear Power Plant Radiation Safety. Yadernaya Fizika i Inzhiniring. 2016, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 129-137 (in Russian).
9. Avezniyazov S.R., Stahiv М.R. Experience in Handling LRW at the Kol’skaya NPP. Radioactivnye Otkhody. 2018, no. 4 (5), pp. 49-54 (in Russian).
10. Bulatov V.I., Tashlykov A. O., Tashlykov O. L. Construction of a Complex for Processing Liquid Radioactive Waste at the Beloyarsk NPP. Mezhdunarodny Nauchnyj Zhurnal «Alternativnaya Energetika i Ekologiya». 2020, no. 25-27 (347-349), pp .62-72 (in Russian).
11. Litovchenko V.Yu., Vasutin N.A., Kozlov A.V., Seleznev E.N. and Tashlykov O.L. Modeling of Combined Radiation Protection when Working with Irradiation Sources. AIP Conf. Proc. 2020, 2313, 020010: DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0033620 .
12. Mikhailova A.F., Tashlykov O.L. The Ways of Implementation of the Optimization Principle in the Personnel Radiological Protection. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2020, v. 83, no. 12, pp. 1718-1726; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063778820100154 .
13. Tashlykov O. L., Scheklein S. Е., Luk’yanenko V.Y., Mikhailova A. F., Russkih I.М., Seleznev Е.N., Коzlov А.V. Optimization of Radiation Protection Composition. Izvestiya Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedenij. Yadernaya Energetika. 2015, no. 4, pp. 36-42 DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2015.4.04 (in Russian).
14. Venicialov Е.V. Multilayer and Multi-Section Filters are Ways to Increase the Efficiency of Sorption Processes. Sorbtsionnye i Khromatograficheskie Processy. 2013, v. 13, no. 3, pp. 284-292 (in Russian).
15. Bel’tyukov A.I., Karpenko A.I., Poluyaktov S.A., Tashlykov O.L., Titov G.P., Tuchkov A.M., Scheklein S.Е. Nuclear Power Plants with Fast Neutron Reactors with Sodium Coolant. Ekaterinburg. UrFU Publ., 2013. Vol. 1. Pp. 548. (in Russian).
16. Khomyakov A., Mordanov S., Tashlykov O., Kostarev V., Litvinov D. Research of the Physical Properties of the Liquid Radioactive Waste Treatment Ion-Selective Sorbents. AIP Conf. Proc. 2021, 2388(1): 040014; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0068415 .
17. Bessonov I.А., Chalpanov S.V., Lezov А.D., Tashlykov O. L., Кlimovа V.А., Mordanov S.V., Homyakov А.P., Rеmеz V.P. Computer modeling and experimental study of hydrodynamic characteristics of sorbents for ion-selective purification. Fizika. Tehnologii. Innovacii : sbornic statej VIII Mezhdunarodnoj molodezhnoj nauchnoj konferencii. 2021. Pp. 46-58 (in Russian).
18. Mordanov S.V., Tashlykov O.L., Homyakov А.P., Rеmеz V.P., Bessonov I.А., Chalpanov S.V. Experimental study of the hydraulic resistance of sorbents for ion-selective purification of LRW. Proc. of the VIII1th Intern. Youthful Scientific Conf. «Fizika. Tekhnologii. Innovatsii. FTI12021». Ekaterinburg. UrFU Publ., 2021, pp. 216-230 (in Russian).
19. Bessonov I.А., Chalpanov S.V., Lezov А.D., Tashlykov O. L., Mordanov S.V., Кlimovа V.А. Computational and Experimental Studies of Water Flow through a Bulk Sorbent Layer During Ion-Selective Purification. Proc. of the Sci. and Pract. Conf. «Yadernye Tekhnologii: ot Issledovaniya k Vnedreniyu – 2021». N. Novgorod, 2021, pp. 25-26 (in Russian).
20. Chalpanov S.V., Bessonov I.А., Lezov А.D., Tashlykov O.L., Mordanov S.V., Кlimovа V.А. Computer Modeling and Experimental Studies of the Flow through the Bulk Sorbent Layer. Proc. of the IV1th Intern. (VII1th Region.) Sci. Conf. «Tekhnogennye Sisyemy i Ekologicheskij Risk». Obninsk Institute for Nuclear Power Engineering, MEPhI Publ., 2021, pp. 108-110 (in Russian).
21. Aladiev A.P., Pakhlyan I.A., Yurtov M.P. Modeling the Parameters of the Jet Pump in Downhole Conditions (Using the Software Product Solidworks Flow Simulation). Proc. of the II1nd Sci. and Pract. Conf. «Science and Technology in the Oil and Gas Business». Krasnodar, 2020, pp. 215-218 (in Russian)