+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/08.pdf"
first_page="81"
last_page="89"
udc="621.039.534.632.4"
title="Simulating Sodium Purification from Oxygen by a Soluble Getter. Izvestiya vuzov"
original_title="Моделирование очистки натрия от кислорода растворимым геттером"
authors=["SutyaginaRО", "AlekseevVV", "SutyaginIА"]
tags=["sodium, fast reactor", "soluble getter", "magnesium", "purification", "concentration", "liquid metal coolant", "reaction constant", "Gibbs thermodynamic potential", "saturation concentration"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.08"

+++

The impurities presented in the liquid metal coolant cause effects that complicate the operation of a nuclear power facility. For example, with an increase of dissolved oxygen in a liquid metal coolant, an increase in the corrosion rate of steels is observed. For modern fast reactors, the task is to create sodium purification systems integrated in the reactor vessel. Getter purification systems have certain attractiveness, especially systems with soluble getters, which have the ability of low-temperature purification of sodium. This article presents the results of modeling the purification of sodium from oxygen by soluble getters. Magnesium is considered as an example of a soluble getter which has the ability of active chemical-physical interaction with sodium oxide to form a solid getter oxide. Next, the formed solid getter oxides are removed by subsequent filtration. To determine the effectiveness of magnesium, a mathematical model of the process of sodium purification from oxygen was developed. The presented mathematical model describes the process of purification of sodium from oxygen by a soluble getter, including the stages of magnesium dissolution in sodium and dilution of the resulting solution with initial sodium. The model concerned also includes: chemical interaction of magnesium with sodium oxide; change of the main system components concentration; formation and coagulation of reaction products. While studying magnesium as a soluble getter, it was found that effective purification of sodium from oxygen is achieved if there is a filter capable of capturing particles with a size of ~ 1⋅10–7 m. In further studies, it is necessary to consider other materials for use as soluble getters, to evaluate the possibility of their use in the device for purification of sodium from oxygen.

### References

1. Nikitin V.I. Physico1Chemical Phenomena under the Influence of Liquid Metals on Solid. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1967, 441 p. (in Russian).
2. Sorokin A.P., Trufanov A.A. Purification of Sodium NPP with Fast Neutron Reactors. VANT. Ser. Yaderno1Reaktornye Konstanty. 2017, iss. 3, pp. 142-162 (in Russian).
3. Kozlov F.A., Konovalov M.A., Sorokin A.P. Purification of Liquid Metal Systems with Sodium Coolant from Oxygen by Getters. Teploenergetika. 2016, no. 5, pp. 63-69; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040363616050040 (in Russian).
4. Kuzina Yu.A., Sorokin A.P. Thermophysics of Alkali Liquid Metals. Part 2: Physical Chemistry, Technology and Innovative Applications (Retrospective-Perspective View). VANT. Ser. Yaderno1Reaktornye Konstanty. 2019, iss. 3, pp. 3-20; DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2019-3-233-251 (in Russian).
5. Kuzina Yu.A., Alekseev V.V., Sorokin A.P., Voronin I.A., Konovalov M.A., Zykova R.O. Investigation of Getter Purification of Sodium From Oxygen. VANT. Ser. Yaderno1 Reaktornye Konstanty. 2020, iss. 3, pp. 110-116; DOI: https://doi.org/10.55176/2414-1038-2020-3-110-116 (in Russian).
6. Alekseev V.V., Kovalev Yu.P., Kalyakin S.G., Kozlov F.A., Kumaev V.Ya., Kondrat’ev A.S., Matyukhin V.V., Sergeev G.P., Sorokin A.P., Torbenkova I.Yu. Treatment Systems for Sodium Coolant at NPPs with BN-1200 Reactor. Teploenergetika. 2013, no. 5, pp. 9-20; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S0040363613050019 (in Russian).
7. Soloviev V.A., Belozerov V.I., Orlova E.A., Alekseev V.V. Studies of Corrosion Processes in Liquid Metals. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2014, 336 p. (in Russian).
8. Subbotin V.I., Ivanovsky M.N., Arnoldov M.N. Physico1Chemical Bases for the Use of Liquid Metal Coolants. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1970, 295 p. (in Russian).
9. Kozlov F.A., Zagorulko Yu.I., Bogdanovich N.G. Solubility of Individual Substances in Sodium: IPPE Preprint-510. Obninsk. FEI Publ., 1974, 98 p. (in Russian).
10. Zykova R.O., Alekseev V.V., Sutyagin I.A. Evaluation of the Effectiveness of Soluble Getters for the Purification of Sodium from Oxygen. Proc. of the IV International (XVII Regional) Scientific Conference «Technogenic Systems and Ecological Risk». Obninsk. IATE NIYaU MIFI Publ., 2021, pp. 50-51 (in Russian).