+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/10.pdf"
first_page="103"
last_page="114"
udc="621.039.7+66.081.6"
title="Innovative Methods of Management of Radioactively Contaminated NPP Water – a Windows of Opportunities"
original_title="Инновационные методы обращения с радиоактивно загрязненными водами АЭС –окна возможностей"
authors=["ChugunovAS", "VinnitskiyVA"]
tags=["liquid radioactive waste", "NPP", "processing", "purification", "membrane separation", "co-precipitation", "drain water", "radionuclides"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.10"

+++

It is shown that the minimum volume of secondary radioactive waste accumulated during the processing of liquid radioactive media can only be achieved by creating conditions that ensure the formation of poorly soluble compounds that contain radionuclides as a natural component. The introduction of radionuclides into the formed solid phase occurs together with their chemical analogues, which are generally contained in the composition of liquid radioactive media being processed. Considering these provisions, as well as the influence of complex formation processes with activated corrosion products after the organization of non-selective concentration processes, for example, by evaporation or reverse osmosis, of radioactively contaminated waters, it should be noted that the system of direct processing of NPP drain waters can be considered the most acceptable in comparison with the processing of radioactive concentrates. The development of a system for fractionation of NPP drain waters is also due to a reduction in the operating volume for disposing of distillation plant bottoms. This opens a «windows of opportunities» for developers of technologies for handling radioactively contaminated solutions. An analysis of the technical solutions of the drain water processing system of the Novoronezh NPP-2 is given.

### References

1. Gataullin R.M., Medelyaev I.A., Sharafutdinov R.B. Promising Technologies for Solving the Problems of Safe Handling of Radioactive Waste. Yadernaya i Radiatsionnaya Bezopasnost’. 2008, no. 4, pp. 68-75 (in Russian).
2. Nassonov G.P., Nechaev A.F. Economic Aspects of “Neutralization” of Radioactive Waste. Izvestiya Sankt6Peterburgskogo Gosudarstvennogo Tekhnologicheskogo Instituta (Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta). 2014, no. 24 (50), pp. 93-97 (in Russian).
3. Matskevich G.V., Kuzmenko L.B., Rogachev E.F., Khrubasik A., Schmidt J. Plant for Deep Evaporation of Radioactive Salt Solutions. Patent RF No. 2129314, 1999 (in Russian).
4. Bagerman M.R., Onufrienko S.V., Frantsuzov A.P., Milovskaya L.A. Solutions for Minimizing the Formation, Organizing the Collection and Processing of Liquid Radioactive Media in the Design of a New Generation NPP with VVER-640. Teploenergetika. 1995, no. 12, pp. 28-31 (in Russian).
5. Avezniyazov S.R., Stakhiv M.R. Experience of Recycling the Liquid Radioactive Waste at the Kola NPP. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2018, no. 4 (5), pp. 49-54 (in Russian).
6. Vinnitskii V.A., Chugunov A.S. Correlation Between Accepted Engineering Approaches to NPP Liquid Radioactive Media Handling Technologies and Natural-Science Ideas About Ongoing Processes. Izvestiya Sankt6Peterburgskogo Gosudarstvennogo Tekhnologicheskogo Instituta (Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta). 2018, no. 46 (72), pp. 114-119 (in Russian).
7. Mukhlenov I.P., Averbukh A.Ya., Tumarkina E.S. et al. General Chemical Technology. Vol. 1: Theoretical Foundations of Chemical Technology. Ed. I.P. Mukhlenov. Moscow. Vysshaya Shkola Publ., 1984, 256 p. (in Russian).
8. General Foundations of Chemical Technology. Transl. from Polish. Eds. Corr. Mem. USSR AS P.G. Romankov and Cand. Sci. (Eng.) M.I. Kurochkina. Leningrad. Khimiya Publ., 1977, 504 p. (in Russian).
9. Savkin A.E. Development and Trials of a Technology for Reprocessing of NPP Liquid Radioactive Wastes. Radiochemistry. 2011, v. 53, no. 5, pp. 555-558; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1066362211050195.
10. Savkin A.E. Improving the Technology of Cleaning the Bottom Residues of the Kola NPP from Radionuclides. VANT. Ser. Materialovedenie i Novye Materialy. 2020, no. 4 (105), pp. 51-59 (in Russian).
11. Dmitriev S.A., Lifanov F.A., Savkin A.E., Lashchenov S.M. NPP Bottoms Handling. Atomnaya Energiya. 2000, v. 89, no. 5, pp. 365-372; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011338231351 (in Russian).
12. Vitkovsky S.L., Danilov A.P., Shchedrin M.G., Kolyagina I.A. The Experience of Implementing the Design Chemistry During the NVNPP II-1 Commissioning. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 172-182; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.16 (in Russian).
13. Volkov A.S., Nalivayko E.M. Radioactive Waste Management at the Novovoronezh NPP II-1 (NPP-2006 Design). Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 183-194. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2017.3.17 (in Russian).
14. Povarov V.P., Gusev I.N., Rosnovsky S.V., Statsura D.B., Kazansky V.R., Goncharov E.V., Mel’nikov E.S., Volkov A.S., Bulka S.K., Ivanov E.A., Korneev I.I. Experience in Implementation of Systems Applied for Drainage Water Ion-Selective Purification from Radionuclides at Units 1, 2 of Novovoronezh-2 NPP. ANRI. 2020, no. 4, pp. 64-70. DOI: https://doi.org/10.37414/2075-1338-2020-103-4-64-70 (in Russian).
15. Shvedov V.P., Sedov V.M., Rybal’chenko I.L., Vlasov I.N. Nuclear Technology: Textbook for Universities. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1979, 336 p. (in Russian).
16. Honikevich A.A. Purification of Radioactively Contaminated Waters of Laboratories and Research Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974, 312 p. (in Russian).
17. Kuznetsov Yu.V., Shchebetkovsky V.N., Trusov A.G. Fundamentals of Water Purification from Radioactive Contamination. Ed. Corr. Mem. USSR AS V.M. Vdovenko. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1974. 360 p. (in Russian).
18. Radiochemistry and Chemistry of Nuclear Processes. Eds. Murin A.N., Nefedov V.D., Shvedov V.P. Leningrad. State Sci. and Techn. Publ. House of Chemical Literature, 1960, 784 p. (in Russian).
19. Dytnersky Yu.I. Baromembrane Processes. Theory and Calculation. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 1986, 272 p. (in Russian).
20. Chugunov A.S., Vinnitskii V.A. Dialysis Membranes Based on Microfiltration Elements for Separating the Components of NPP Radioactive Wastewater via Precipitation. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 127, iss. 5, pp. 288-295; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00625-3 .
21. Chugunov A.S., Vinnitskii V.A. Osmotic Effects during Filtration through Composite Membranes Formed in Water Treatment Processes. Petroleum Chemistry. 2018, v. 58, no. 6, pp. 490-495; DOI 10.1134/S096554411806004X.
22. Omel’chuk V.V., Stahiv M.R., Savkin A.E., Ferorov D.A., Kornev V.I. Development of Technology and Processing of Distillation Residues at the Kola NPP. Bezopasnost’ Okruzhajuschej Sredy. 2007, no. 3, pp. 34-37 (in Russian).
23. Lagunova Y.O. The Using of Ozone and Hydrogen Peroxide for Oxidative Decomposition of Organic Complexones in the Processes of Purification of Liquid Radioactive Waste. Cand. Sci. (Chem.) Diss. Moscow. FSBIS IPCE RAS Publ., 2012, 159 p. (in Russian).
24. Penzin R.A, Svitsov A.A. Development of Technologies for Handling Liquid Radioactive Waste of Nuclear Power Plants. Radioaktivnye Otkhody. 2020, no. 4 (13), pp. 90-98; DOI: https://doi.org/10.25283/2587-9707-2020-4-90-98 (in Russian).
25. Acceptance Criteria for Radioactive Waste for Disposal. NP-093-14. Yadernaja i Radiacionnaja bezopasnost’. 2015, no. 3, pp. 59-82 (in Russian).