+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/11.pdf"
first_page="115"
last_page="127"
udc="621.039.31"
title="Calculation of Enriched Uranium Products Costs in Multi&Threaded Cascades of Enrichment Process"
original_title="Расчёт стоимости обогащённых урановых продуктов многопоточных каскадов разделительного производства"
authors=["SemenovEV", "KharitonovVV"]
tags=["enriched uranium products cost", "multi-threaded enrichment production", "separative work unit", "effectiveness of involvement of depleted uranium in production process"]
rubric = "economics"
rubric_name = "Economics of nuclear power"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.11"

+++

At modern uranium enrichment facilities there are several raw materials can be used simultaneously as a feed: natural uranium, regenerated uranium obtained as a result of SNF reprocessing, or depleted uranium (all in the form of uranium hexafluoride). At the output of the separation cascade, several types of enriched uranium product with different level of enrichment can be simultaneously produced. The article suggests a method of calculating the cost of each enriched uranium product in multi-threaded separation cascades that is missing in the literature. The methodology suggests use of standard definitions of the isotopic value of feed and product and the separation potential proposed by Peierls and Dirac. Numerical calculations of the cost of enriched uranium products for three production tasks are given as examples of the effectiveness of the methodology: 1) the involvement of depleted uranium hexafluoride in the production of an enriched uranium product; 2) the simultaneous production of two enriched products; 3) the use of depleted uranium to reduce the cost of a more highly enriched product of the two (in relation to a promising tolerant fuel). It is shown that partial use of depleted uranium as a feed for a multi-product separation cascade can reduce the cost of a product with a higher level of enrichment; with the prevailing market prices for natural uranium and SWU, there is a big range of tail assay levels, in which it is more profitable to enrich depleted uranium, rather than natural uranium.

### References

1. Smirnov A.Yu., Sulaberidze G.A. Enrichment of Regenerated Uranium with Simultaneous Dilution of 232–236U by Raw and Waste Uranium. Atomic Energy, 2014, v. 117, no.1, pp. 44-51; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-014-9886-0 .
2. Palkin V.A., Smirnov A.Yu., Sulaberidze G.A. Gas Centrifuge Cascade for Concentrating 235U in Additional Product and Purification of Processed Uranium Hexafluoride from 232,234,236U. Atomic Energy, 2021, v.130, no.2, pp. 88-93; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00779-8 .
3. Palkin V.A., Maslyukov E.V. Purification of Regenerated Uranium Hexafluoride by Removal of 232,234,236U in the Intermediate Product of a Two-Feed-Flow Cascade. Atomic Energy, 2019, v. 126, no. 2, pp. 110-115; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00523-3 .
4. Kovalev N.V., Zilberman B.Ya., Goretsky N.D., Sinyukhin A.B. A New Approach to the Reuse of Spent Nuclear Fuel of Thermal Reactors within the REMIX Concept. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2020, no. 1, pp. 67-77; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.1.07 (in Russian).
5. Dekusar V.M., Kagramanyan V.S., Kalashnikov A.G., Kapranova E.N., Korobitsyn V.E., Puzakov A.Yu. Analysis of the Characteristics of REMIX Fuel During Multiple Recycling in VVER Reactors. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika, 2013, no. 4, pp. 109-117; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2013.4.14 (in Russian).
6. Pavlov Yu.G., Ulyanin Yu.A., Lazarev D.A., Kharitonov V.V. Economic Efficiency of Bringing Depleted Uranium into Enrichment. Atomic Energy. 2019, v. 127, no.1, pp. 33-39; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00580-8 .
7. Ulyanin Yu.A., Kharitonov V.V. Economics of a Balanced Nuclear Fuel Cycle with Innovative REMIX Fuel. Mikroekonomika, 2021, no. 2, pp. 55-63 (in Russian).
8. Matvienko A.V., Kharitonov V.V., Pavlov Yu.G., Ulyanin Yu.A. Competitiveness Assessment of Regenerated Uranium-Plutonium Remix Fuel in Thermal Reactors. Atomic Energy, 2021, v. 130, no. 1, pp. 57-62; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00774-z .
9. Sinev M.N. Economics of Nuclear Energy: Fundamentals of Technology and Economics of Nuclear Fuel Production. Economics of Nuclear Power Plants: Textbook for Universities. 3-rd ed. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1987, 480 p. (in Russian).
10. Gordeev B.K. Introduction to the Economics of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle of Nuclear Energy. Moscow. TsNIIATOMINFORM Publ., 2001, 128 p. (in Russian).
11. Borisevich V.D., Borman V.D., Sulaberidze G.A. Physical Bases of Isotope Separation in a Gas Centrifuge. Edited by V.D. Borman: Textbook. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2005, 320 p. (in Russian).
12. Kharitonov V.V. Dynamics of Nuclear Energy Development. Economic and Analytical Models. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2014, 328 p. (in Russian).
13. Rothwell G. Market power in uranium enrichment. Science & Global Security, 2009, no. 17, pp. 132-154; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/08929880903423586 .
14. Results of the Activities of Atomenergoprom JSC for 2020. Annual Report. 147 p. Available at: http://atomenergoprom.ru/ru/invest/annual (accessed Feb. 10, 2022) (in Russian).
15. Diehl Peter. Re-Enrichment of West European Depleted Uranium Tails in Russia. WISE Uranium Project, 2004, 47 p. Available at: https://www.laka.org/docu/boeken/pdf/6-01-2-25-12.pdf#page=2 (accessed Feb. 10, 2022).
16. Bannink Dirk. URENCO 19702020: From the treaty of ALMELO to atom ausstieg. WISE, 2020. Available at: https://wiseinternational.org/labels/enrichment (accessed Feb. 10, 2022).
17. Semenov E.V., Kharitonov V.V. Microeconomics of Improving the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants Based on Tolerant Fuel. Mikroekonomika, 2021, no. 5, pp. 49-62 (in Russian).
18. State-of-the-Art Report on Light Water Reactor Accident-Tolerant Fuels. NEA-OECD, 2018. 372 p.
19. Karpyuk L.A., Lysikov A.V., Maslov A.A., Mikheev E.N., Novikov V.V., Orlov V.K., Titov A.O. Prospective Accident-Tolerant Uranium-Molybdenum Metal Fuel. Atomic Energy. 2021, v. 130, no. 3. pp. 156-160; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00787-8 .
20. Karpyuk L.A., Novikov V.V., Kulakov G.V., Konovalov Yu.V., Leontieva-Smirnova M.V., Golubnichy A.A., Ivanov S.I., Makarov F.V., Glebov A.V. 42KhNM Alloy and Silicon Carbide as Material for Accident-Tolerant Fuel-Rod Cladding. Atomic Energy. 2021, v. 130, no. 4, pp. 224-228; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10512-021-00799-4 .