+++

categories="article"
date="2022-06-20T00:12:00+03:00"
issue="2022-02"
issue_name="2022 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2022/02/12.pdf"
first_page="128"
last_page="137"
udc="621.039.51"
title="The Effect of Errors in the Neutron Flux Density on the Uncertainties of Nuclear Concentrations of Nuclides Arising During the Calculation of Fuel Burnup in Cells with Different Neutron Spectra"
original_title="Влияние погрешностей в плотности потока нейтронов на погрешности ядерных концентраций нуклидов, возникающие в процессе расчета выгорания топлива в ячейках с различным спектром нейтронов"
authors=["PisarevAN", "KolesovVV", "KolesovDV"]
tags=["reactor plant", "burnup calculations", "uncertainties in nuclear data", "uncertainties in nuclide nuclear concentrations", "Monte Carlo method", "neutron spectrum"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2022.2.12"

+++

Computational studies showing the complex temporal dependence of uncertainties in nuclear concentrations of various nuclides arising from the transfer of the neutron flux density error in the burnup calculation process in cells with different neutron spectra on the above errors are carried out.

It is found that these uncertainties not only depend on the burnup time in a complex way, but also depend on the spectrum of the cell. The variants of the cell with thermal and fast neutron spectra were considered.

The calculations were performed using the VisualBurnOut program [14], which makes it possible to estimate these uncertainties arising due to errors in the input parameters of the burnup problem (reaction rates, neutron flux density, etc.).

The influence of the number of calculated burnup points on the results of burnup calculations by the Monte Carlo method was investigated. Uncertainties arising in nuclear concentrations at intermediate calculation steps due to errors in nuclear concentrations appearing at the previous step were taken into account in the calculations.

### References

1. Trellue H.R. Modification of Monteburns to Maintain Criticality Throughout the Burnup Cycle. Transactions of American Nuclear Society. 2006, v. 95, no. 1, pp. 315-316.
2. Okumura K. et al. Validation of a Continuous-Energy Monte Carlo Burnup Code MVP-BURN and its Application to Analysis of Post Irradiation Experiment. Nuclear Science and Technology. 2000, v. 37, no. 128, pp. 128-138; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2000.9714876 .
3. Fensin M.L., Hendricks J.S., Trellue H.R., Anghie S. Incorporation of a Predictor-Corrector Methodology and 1-Group Reaction Rate Reporting Scheme for the MCNPX Depletion Capability. Transactions of American Nuclear Society. 2006, v. 95, no. 1, pp. 317-319.
4. Shim H.J., Kim C.H. Error Propagation Module Implemented in the MC-CARD Monte Carlo Code. Transactions of American Nuclear Society. 2002, v. 95, no. 1, pp. 325-326.
5. Takeda T., Hirokawa N., Noda T. Estimation of Error Propagation in Monte-Carlo Burnup Calculations. Nuclear Science and Technology. 1999, v. 36, no. 9, pp. 738-745; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.1999.9726262 .
6. Tohjoh M., Endo T., Watanabe M., Yamamoto A. Effect of Error Propagation of Nuclide Number Densities on Monte Carlo Burn-Up Calculations. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2006, v. 33, no. 17-18, pp. 1424-1436; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2006.09.010 .
7. Garcia-Herranz N., Cabellos O., Sanz J., Juan J., Kuijper J.C. Propagation of Statistical and Nuclear Data Uncertainties in Monte Carlo Burn-Up Calculations. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2008, v. 35, no. 4, pp. 714-730; DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2007.07.022 .
8. Park H.J., Shim H.J., Kim C.H. Uncertainty Propagation in Monte Carlo Depletion Analysis. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 2011, v. 167, no. 3, pp. 196-208; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NSE09-106 .
9. Rochman D., Koning A.J., Da Cruz D.F. Propagation of 235,236,238U and 239Pu Nuclear Data Uncertainties for a Typical PWR Fuel Element. Nuclear Technology. 2012, v. 179, no. 3, pp. 323-338; DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NT11-61 .
10. Newell Quentin, Sanders Charlotta. Stochastic Uncertainty Propagation in Monte Carlo Depletion Calculations. Nuclear Science and Engineering. 2015, v. 179, no. 3, pp. 253-263. DOI: https://doi.org/10.13182/NSE13-44 .
11. Minamigawa Yasuhiro, Kitcher Evans D., Chirayath Sunil S. A Method to Estimate Fission Product Concentration Uncertainty in a Multi-Time-Step MCNP6 Code Nuclear Fuel Burnup Calculation. Nuclear Technology. 2019. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2019.1624429 .
12. Pisarev A.N., Kolesov V.V. Investigation of the Transfer of Uncertainties in Nuclear Data to Nuclear Concentrations of Nuclides in Burnup Calculations. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2020, no. 2, pp. 108-121; DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.10 (in Russian).
13. Stepanek P. Vontobel. EIR Results for the HCLWR NEACRP Burn-out Benchmark Obtained Using EIR Version of DANDE System and JEF Library. Report NEACRP-A-851 (1987).
14. Kolesov V.V., Khitrik D.V., Kamaev D.A. VisualBurnOut Program. Registration No. 2009617021 dated 23.12.2009 in Computer Program Register.
15. Kolesov V.V., Novichkov A.V., Voznyakevich E., and Terekhova A.M. Statistical Approach to Estimated Uncertainty of Nuclear Concentration in Problems of Isotope Kinetics. Proc. of the XIII International Youth Scientific and Practical Conference «Future of Atomic Energy – AtomFuture 2017». KnE Engineering. 2017, pp. 261-267; DOI: https://doi.org/10.18502/keg.v3i3.1625 .