+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="16"
udc="628.1.17"
title="Operating experience and ways of improving the efficiency of the service water system for Power Unit 1 and 2 at novovoronezh NPP-2"
original_title="Опыт эксплуатации и пути повышения эффективности работы системы технического водоснабжения энергоблоков № 1, 2 Нововоронежской АЭС-2"
authors=["PovarovVP", "StatsuraDB", "UsachevDE"]
tags=["Novovoronezh NPP-2", "VVER-1200", "engineering support", "service water supply", "operating experience", "upgrade", "cooling towers"]
rubric = "nuclearpowerplants"
rubric_name = "Nuclear power plants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.01"

+++

The operating experience of Power Unit 1 of Novovoronezh NPP-2 shows that in the summer period the temperature of cooling water exceeds the design value, which indicates the insufficient efficiency of the service water system. The main factor that negatively affects the efficiency of this system is the formation of carbonate deposits on the cooling tower filler. At Power Unit 1 of Novovoronezh NPP-2, the water distribution system of the cooling tower was cleaned of carbonate deposits by the combined vibration and aero-hydraulic method. The applied and tested method for cleaning the filler cannot be considered optimal, since it is associated with partial disassembly of the cooling tower filler, and the main stage determining the duration of the entire cleaning is the filler assembly/disassembly. Further research is required in order to select a strategy for controlling the rate of the formation of carbonate deposits, taking into account the revealed influence of design features of the main cooling water pipelines and cooling tower water distribution pipelines on the deposit formation mechanism in the peripheral spraying area. 

As a compensating measure to ensure the required temperature regime of the turbine plant equipment at Power Unit 1 of Novovoronezh NPP-2 in summer, it is practiced to include in the parallel operation of the backup heat exchangers of the lubrication system and the standby pump of the nonessential services chilled water system. 

To increase the operational stability of the power units in the summer period, it is proposed to carry out a number of measures at Power Units 1 and 2 of Novovoronezh NPP-2 aimed at mitigating the negative consequences caused by the increased temperature of service water. Options for the equipment upgrade are evaluated by installing an additional cooling pump for the turbine building consumers and/or installing an additional pipeline to supply make-up water from the Don River directly to the suction pipelines of the cooling system pumps for the turbine building consumers.

### References

1. Cooling towers of industrial and power enterprises: Reference Manual. Ed. V.S. Ponomarenko. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1998. 376 p. (in Russian). 
2. Nikoladze G.I. Water Supple. Moscow. Stroyizdat Publ., 1989. 496 p. (in Russian). 
3. Novovoronezh NPP. Design AES-2006. Available at:  http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/ upload/iblock/f01/f01b5ca309dbda1917c112d6897c0959.pdf (accessed 15.12.2019) (in Russian). 
4. Bodrov.U.M, Saveliev R.Z. Condensing Units of Steam Turbines. Moscow: Energoatomizdat Publ., 1994. 287 p. (in Russian). 
5. Turbines of Thermal and Nuclear Power Plants: University Textbook. Eds. A.G. Kostiuk, V.V. Frolov. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2001. 488 p. (in Russian). 
6. Basic rules of nuclear power plant operation. Available at: http://meganorm.ru/Index2/ 1/4293748/4293748439.htm (accessed 15.12.2019) (in Russian). 
7. Asmolov V.G., Gusev I.N, Kazanskiy V.R., Povarov V.P., Statsura D.B. New generation first of the kind unit – VVER-1200 design features. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 3, pp. 5-21 (in Russian). 
8. Ostreikovskiy V.A., Shvyriaev U.V. Safety of nuclear power plants. Probabilistic Analysis. Moscow. Fizmatlit Publ, 2008. 352 p. (in Russian). 
9. Kycherenko D.I., Gladkov V.A. Circulating Water Supply. Moscow. Stroiizdat Publ.,1980. 168 p. (in Russian). 
10. Kopylov A.S., Lavygin V.M., Ochkov V.F. Water Treatment. Moscow. MEI Publ., 2006. 312 p. (in Russian). 
11. Vitkovsky S.L., Danilov A.P., Shchedrin M.G., Kolyagina I.A. The experience of implementing the design chemistry during NPP unit commissioning. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017. – no. 3. – pp. 172-182 (in Russian). 
12. Laptev A.G., Vedgaeva I.A. Cooling Towers Design and Dimensioning. Kazan. KGEU Publ., 2004. 180 p. (in Russian). 
13. Cooling towers water-chemical mode for VVER Power Units. Proc. of the XI ISPS «Safety, Efficiency and Economics of Nuclear Industry». JSC «Concern Rosenergoatom». Moscow. 2018. С. 14-24. Available at: http://mntk.rosenergoatom.ru/mediafiles/u/files/2018/ MNTK_2018_Trudy_Color_small.pdf (accessed 15.12.2019). (in Russian). 
14. Lebedik E.A., Sharikov Yu.V., Zheleznov V.V. Quality control of circulating water of waterheat exchange equipment. Khimicheskaya Tekhnologiya. 2016, no. 1, pp. 38-44 (in Russian). 
15. Gusev I.N., Solovyev B.L., Padun S.P., Mayorova M.M.. System development of intelligent operator supportat unit no. 1 of the Novovoronezh NPP-2. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 3, pp. 5-15. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.3.01 (in Russian). 
16. NP-001-15. General Provisions for the Safety of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. FBU «NTTsYaRB» Publ., 2016, 30 p. (in Russian). 
17. RB-002-16. Nuclear Power Safety Regulations. Water3Chemical Mode for Nuclear Power Plants. Available at: http//meganorm.ru/Index2/1/4293752/4293752457.htm (accessed 15.12.2019) (in Russian). 