+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:22:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="02"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/02.pdf"
first_page="17"
last_page="26"
udc="621.039.5"
title="Power density dynamics in a nuclear reactor with an extended in-core pulse-periodic neutron source based on a magnetic trap"
original_title="Динамика энерговыделения в активной зоне ядерного реактора c внутренним протяженным импульсно-периодическим источником нейтронов на основе магнитной ловушки"
authors=["ShamaninIV", "BedenkoSV", "ShmakovVM", "ModestovDG", "KnyshevVV", "LutsikIO", "PolozkovSD"]
tags=["fission wave", "D-D neutron plasma pulse periodic generator", "fusion- fission hybrid reactor"]
rubric = "physicsandtechnology"
rubric_name = "Physics and technology of nuclear reactors"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.02"

+++

Spatial kinetics peculiarities of an innovative hybrid nuclear power facility with an extended neutron source based on a magnetic trap are investigated. The investigated fusion-fission facility includes a reactor plant the core of which consists of a unitized HTGR reactor thorium-plutonium fuel block assembly and a lengthy magnetic trap which runs through the near-axis reactor core region. The engineering solution for the neutron plasma generator is based on an online gas dynamic trap based on a fusion neutron source (GDT-FNS) developed at the Novosibirsk G.I. Budker Nuclear Physics Institute of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences. The GDT-FNS high-temperature plasma pinch is formed in a pulse periodic mode in the investigated hybrid facility configuration, and, at a certain pulse ratio, one should expect the formation of a fission wave that diverges from the axial part of the system and propagates over the volume of the fuel block assembly in a time correlation with the fast D-D neutron pulse source. In these conditions, it is essential to study the fission wave propagation process and, accordingly, the power density distribution formation within the facility’s blanket. The paper presents the results of a study into the steady-state and spatial-time performance of neutron fluxes and the power density dynamics in the facility under investigation. The steady-state neutronic performance and the spatial-time fission wave propagation were simulated using the PRIZMA code developed at VNIITF. 

This research was supported by RFBR, Project no. 19-29-02005 mk.

### References

1. Arzhannikov A., Bedenko S., Shmakov V. et al. Gas-cooled thorium reactor at various fuel loadings and its modification by a plasma source of extra neutrons. Nuclear Science and Techniques. 2019, v. 30, no. 181, pp. 1-11. 
2. Arzhannikov A.V., Shamanin I.V., Bedenko S.V., et al. Hybrid thorium energy producing subcritical stand with a fusion neutron source based on a magnetic trap. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 43-54. DOI: https://doi.org/10.26583/ npe.2019.2.04 (in Russian). 
3. Shamanin I.V., Chertkov Y.B., Bedenko S.V., Mendoza O., Knyshev V.V., Grachev V.M. Neutronic properties of high-temperature gas-cooled reactors with thorium fuel. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2018, v. 113, pp. 286-293. 
4. Bedenko S.V., Ghal-Eh N., Lutsik I.O., Shamanin I.V. A fuel for generation IV nuclear energy system: Isotopic composition and radiation characteristics. Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 2019, v. 147, pp. 189-196. 
5. Yurov D.V., Anikeev A.V., Bagryansky P.A.,et al. Parameters optimization in a hybrid system with a gas dynamic trap-based neutron source. Fusion Engineering and Design. 2012, v. 87, pp. 1684-1692.
6. Beklemishev A., Anikeev A., Astrelin V. et al. Novosibirsk Project of Gas-Dynamic Multiple- Mirror Trap. Fusion Science and Technology. 2013, v. 63(1T), pp. 46-51. 
7. Anikeev A.V., Bagryansky P.A., Beklemishev A.D. et al.The GDT Experiment: Status and Recent Progress in Plasma Parameters. Fusion Science and Technology. 2015, v. 68 (1),pp. 1-7. 
8. Bagryansky P, Chen Z., Kotelnikov I. et al. Development strategy for steady-state fusion volumetric neutron source based on the gas-dynamic trap. Nuclear Fusion. 2020, v. 60, no. 036005, pp. 1-15. 
9. Arzhannikov A.V., Anikeev A.B., Beklemishev A.D. et al. Subcritical Assembly with Thermonuclear Neutron Source as Device for Studies of Neutron-physical Characteristics of Thorium Fuel. AIP Conference Proceedings. 2016, v. 1771, no. 090004, pp. 1-5. 
10. Kandiev Y.Z., Kashaeva E.A., Khatuntsev K.E.PRIZMA status. Annals of Nuclear Energy. 2015, v. 82, pp. 116-120. 
11. Nuclear Energy Agency. Available at: https://oecd-nea.org/dbdata/data/ nds_eval_libs.htm, (accessed Mar 03, 2020). 
12. Velasquez C.E., Pereira C., Veloso M.A.F. et al. Fusion–Fission Hybrid Systems for Transmutation. Journal of Fusion Energy. 2016,v. 35, pp. 505-512. 
13. Simonen T.C., Moir R.W., Molvik A.W., Ryutov D.D. A 14MeV fusion neutron source for material and blanket development and fission fuel production. Nuclear Fusion.2013, v. 53, no. 063002, pp. 1-5. 
14. Gudowski W., Arzhanov V., Broeders C., et al. Review of the European project – Impact of Accelerator-Based Technologies on nuclear fission safety (IABAT). Progress in Nuclear Energy. 2001, v. 38 (1-2), pp. 135-151. 
15. Shmelev A.N., Kulikov G.G., Kurnaev V.A. et al. Hybrid Fusion-Fission Reactor with a Thorium Blanket: it’s Potential in the Fuel Cycle of Nuclear Reactors. Physics of Atomic Nuclei. 2015, v. 78, pp. 1100-1111. 
16. Knastera J., Arbeiter F., Carac P. et al. IFMIF, the European-Japanese efforts under the Broader Approach agreement towards a Li(d,xn) neutron source: Current status and future options.  Nuclear Materials and Energy. 2016, v. 8, pp. 46-54. 
17. Moir R.W., Martovetsky N.N., Molvik A.W., Ryutov Dimitri and Simonen T.C. Mirror-based hybrids of recent design. AIP Conference Proceedings. 2012, v. 1442, pp. 43-54. 