+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/04.pdf"
first_page="39"
last_page="51"
udc="621.039.534"
title="Thermodynamics of equilibria and approaches to analyzing the mass transport in metal-oxide systems"
original_title="Термодинамика равновесных состояний и подходы к анализу массопереноса в металлооксидных системах"
authors=["LavrovaOV", "LegkikhAY"]
tags=["state diagram", "iron", "liquid-metal coolant", "oxygen", "corrosion", "metal-oxide system", "oxidation potential", "equilibrium pressure"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.04"

+++

Analysis of corrosion processes has a major role in justifying the reliability and safety of developed nuclear reactors of a new generation with heavy liquid-metal coolants. An approach has been developed which allows practical conclusions to be made with respect to the processes in the given metal-oxide system based on an analysis of state diagrams for these systems in the «oxidation potential-temperature» coordinates. The proposed approach relies on a long-term experience of experimental and computational studies concerned with the interaction of various steel grades with molten lead and lead-bismuth, as well as with the transport of metal impurities within these molten metals. The oxidation potential of a metal-oxide system is measured in experimental studies using oxygen activity sensors developed and manufactured at IPPE. The applicability of the proposed approach to analyzing the processes of mass transport in iron-oxygen, lead-oxygen, sodium-oxygen, and iron-water vapor systems has been demonstrated. 

### References

1. Shimansky A. F., Belousova N. V., Vasilieva M. N. Physics and chemistry of inorganic materials. Course of lectures. Krasnoyarsk. IPK SFU Publ., 2009, 204 p. (in Russian). ISBN 978-5-7638-1779-9. 
2. Nechaev V.V., Smirnov E.A., Kohtev S.A., Kalin B.A., Polyansky A.A., Statsenko V.I. Fundamentals of materials science. Volume 2. Moscow. MEPhI Publ., 2007, 608 p. (in Russian). ISBN 978-5-7262-0821-3. 
3. Kubaschewski O., Hopkins B. Oxidation of metals and alloys. Moscow. Metallurgy Publ., 1965, 428 р. (in Russian).
4. Uiks K.E.. Thermodynamic properties of 65 elements – their oxides, halides, carbides, and nitrides. Moscow. Metallurgiya Publ., 1965, 240 р. (in Russian). 
5. Veryatin U.D., Mashirev V.P., Ryabcev N.G., Tarasov V.I., Rogozkin B.D., Korobov I.V. Thermodynamic properties of the inorganic substances. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1965, 460 р. (in Russian). 
6. Kulikov I. S. Thermodynamics of oxides. Moscow. Metallurgy Publ., 1986, 344 р. (in Russian). 
7. Subbotin V.I., Ivanovsky M.N., Arnoldov M.N. Physical and chemical bases of the liquid metal coolants application. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1970, 296 р. (in Russian). 
8. Alekseev V.V., Kozlov F.A., Sorokin A.P., Varseev E.V., Orlova E.A., Torbenkova I.Y. Mass transfer of corrosion products and corrosion of steel in sodium at high hydrogen concentrations. Teploenergetika. 2015, no. 10, pp. 72-80. DOI: 10.1134/S0040601515100018 (in Russian). 
9. Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermalhydraulics and Technologies. OECD/NEA, 2015, no. 7268, 950 р. 
10. Askhadullin R.S., Martynov P.N., Rachkov V.I., Legkikh A.Y., Storozhenko A.N., Ul’yanov V.V., Gulevskiy V.A. Monitoring and control of the oxygen content in heavy liquid-metal coolants for anticorrosion protection of steels. Teplofizika Vysokikh Temperatur. 2016, v. 54, no. 4, pp. 564-572. DOI: 10.1134/S0018151X16040015 (in Russian). 
11. Bagotsky V.S. Fundamentals of electrochemistry. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 1988. 400 p. (in Russian). ISBN 5-7245-0051-5. 
12. Lineckij B. L., Krupin A.V., Opara B.K., Rakoch A.G. Oxidation5free heating of rare metals and alloys in vacuum. Moscow. Metallurgy Publ., 1985, 184 р. (in Russian). 
13. Gromov B.F., SHmatko B.A. Physical and chemical properties of lead-bismuth melts. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 1996, no. 4, pp. 35–41 (in Russian). 
14. Martynov P.N., Askhadullin R.Sh., Simakov A.A., Chaban’ A.Yu., Chernov M.E., Lanskikh V.S., Legkih A.Yu. Сreation of automatic system for monitoring, forecasting and control of condition of lead-bismuth (lead) coolant and surfaces of circuits of nuclear power plants. Proc. or the XVII-th Int. Conf. on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE17). Brussels, Belgium, July 12-16, 2009. DOI: 10.1115/ICONE17-75504. 
15. Damaskin B.B., Petrij O.A., Cirlina G.A. Electrochemistry. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 2006, 672 р. (in Russian). ISBN 5-98109-011-1. 
16. Glushko V.P. Thermodynamic properties of the individual substances. Moscow. Nauka Publ., 1978, 496 р. (in Russian). 
17. Facility for the analysis of chemical thermodynamics. Available at: http://www.crct.polymtl.ca/fact (accessed Aug 15, 2019). 
18. JANAF Thermochemical Tables. Sec. NBS USA, Washington, 1971. 1100 p. 
19. Tamm M.E., Tretyakov Yu.D. Physical and chemical bases of inorganic chemistry: Textbook for students. Moscow. Publishing center «Akademiya», 2004. 240 p. ISBN 5-7695-1446-9 (in Russian). 
20. Kinev E.A., Pastuhov V.I., Glushkova N.V. Liquid-metal corrosion of cladding steel in sodium coolant. VANT. Ser.: Yaderno5Reaktornye Konstanty. 2017, iss. 3, pp. 80-86 (in Russian). 