+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="06"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/06.pdf"
first_page="64"
last_page="72"
udc="621.039"
title="Experimentral studies into the performance of the lead coolant axial pump wet ends to justify main circulation pumps for the hmlc reactor plant circuits"
original_title="Экспериментальные исследования характеристик проточных частей осевых насосов для свинцового теплоносителя в обоснование главных циркуляционных насосов контуров РУ с ТЖМТ"
authors=["BeznosovAV", "BokovPA", "LvovAV", "BokovaTA", "VolkovNS", "MarovAP"]
tags=["fast neutron reactor", "main circulation pump", "heavy liquid metal coolant", "impellers", "impeller blades", "pump feed and discharge"]
rubric = "coolants"
rubric_name = "Chemistry, physics and technology of reactor coolants"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.06"

+++

The paper presents the results of the studies to justify the design solutions for the main circulation pumps of the heavy liquid metal cooled reactor plant circuits. A substantial difference has been shown in the performance of pumps for the heavy liquid metal coolant transfer. The studies have confirmed the qualitative difference in the cavitation performance of coolants, the state of the gases and vapors they contain, the influence of supply and discharge devices, and the influence of the impeller blade profile performance and geometry and the hub-tip ratio on the pump performance. The studies were performed based on NNSTU’s lead-cooled test facilities with the coolant temperature in a range of 440 to 550°C and the coolant flow rate of up to 2000 t/h. The outer diameter of the impellers and the straightening apparatuses was about 200 mm, and the thickness of the straight 08Kh18N10T steel blades was 4.0 mm and that of the profile blades was up to 6.0 mm. The pump shaft speed changed in a stepped manner from 600 rev/min to 1100 rev/min after each 100 rev/min. 
The studies were conducted to justify the engineering and design solutions for pumps as applied to conditions of small and medium plants with fast neutron lead cooled reactors currently under investigation at NNSTU (BRS-GPG). The experimental results can be recommended for use to design other HLMC transferring pumps. 

### References

1. Beznosov A.V., Dragunov Ju.G., Rachkov V.I. Heavy Liquid Metal Coolants in Nuclear Energy. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2006. 435 p. (in Russian). 
2. Karelin V.Ya. Cavitation Phenomena in Centrifugal and Axial Pumps. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1975. 336 p. (in Russian).
3. Lomakin A.A. Centrifugal and Axial Pumps. Moscow-Leningrad. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1966. 364 p. (in Russian). 
4. Budov V.M. Pumps of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1986. 408 p. (in Russian). 
5. Mihajlov A.K., Maljushenko V.V. Paddle Pumps. Theory, Calculation and Design. Moscow. Mashinostroenie Publ., 1977. 288 p. (in Russian). 
6. Rozhdestvenskij V.V. Cavitation. Leningrad. Sudostroenie Publ., 1977. 247 p. (in Russian). 
7. Chechyotkin A.V. High Temperature Coolants. Moscow. Energia Publ., 1971. 496 p. (in Russian). 
8. Beznosov A.V., Bokova T.A. Equipment of Power Circuits with Heavy Liquid1Metal Coolants in Nuclear Power Engineering. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2012. 536 p. (in Russian). 
9. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Bokova T.A. Technologies and the Basic Equipment of Circuits of Reactor Installations, Industrial and Research Stands with Lead and Lead/Bismuth Coolants. Nizhny Novgorod. NGTU Publ., 2016. 488 p. (in Russian). 
10. Beznosov A.V., Antonenkov M.A., Bokov P.A., Baranova V.S., Kustov M.S. Specificity of circulating pumps of reactor circuits with lead and leadbismuth coolants. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika. 2009, no. 4, pp. 155-160 (in Russian). 
11. Dragunov Yu.G., Lemekhov V.V., Moiseev A.V., Smirnov V.S. Fast neutron reactor with lead coolant (BREST). Problemy Mashinostroeniya i Avtomatizacii. 2015, no. 3, pp. 97-103 (in Russian). 
12. Bokov P. A. Investigation of the conditions for the occurrence and characteristics of cavitation in fast neutrons cooling heavy liquid metal coolant. Cand. tech. sci. diss. Nizhny Novgorod, NGTU Publ., 2015, 177 p. (in Russian). 
13. Beznosov A.V., T.A. Bokova, P.A. Bokov, N.S. Volkov, A.A. Karbyshev. Specific solutions of the reactor circuit of the BRS-GPG low and medium power plants with lead and lead-bismuth coolants. VANT. Ser.: Fizika Yadernykh Reaktorov. 2018, iss. 2, pp. 28-34 (in Russian). 
14. A.V. Beznosov, A.V. Lvov, T.A. Bokova, P.A. Bokov, N.S. Lukichev. Experimental studies of the dependence of the characteristics of axial pumps pumping lead coolant on the parameters of the straightening apparatus. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2019, no. 2, pp. 138- 146 (in Russian). 
15. Beznosov, A.V. Lvov, N.S. Volkov, N.S. Lukichev, K.V. Menskaya, P.A. Bokov, T.A. Bokova, E.G. Novinsky, A.R. Marov. Experimental studies of the dependences of axial pumps pumping a lead heat carrier from the geometry of the exit plot of the blades of the work profiles of the worker wheel profiles. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva, 2019, no. 1 (124), pp. 76-82 (in Russian). 
16. Beznosov A.V., Lvov A.V., Bokov P.A., Bokova P.A., Razin V.A. Experimental studies of the dependencies of the characteristics of axial pumps, pumped lead coolant, on the parameters of grids of profiles of impellers. Izvestiya vuzov. Yadernaya Energetika. 2017, no. 1, pp. 138- 144 (in Russian). 
17. Beznosov A.V., Bokov P.A., Zudin A.D., Lvov A.V., Bokova T.A., Trushkov N.V. Hydrodynamics and efficiency of models of MCP BREST-OD-300 in a lead coolant at the FT-4 stand of the NNSTU. Trudy NGTU im. R.E. Alekseeva. 2014, no. S5, p. 370 (in Russian). 
18. Beznosov A.V., Drozdov Yu.N., Antonenkov M.A., Bokova T.A., L’vov A.V., Lemekhov V.V. Experimental study of the flowing part of the model of the axial main circulation pump of a reactor installation with a heavy liquid metal coolant. Vestnik Mashinostroeniya. 2014, no. 2, pp. 38-45 (in Russian). 
19. Papyr A.N. Water/Jet Propulsion of Small Vessels. Leningrad. Sudostroenie Publ., 1970, 256 p. (in Russian). 