+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:16:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/07.pdf"
first_page="73"
last_page="84"
udc="621.039.75+621.039.58"
title="Providing rationale for the possibility of decommissioning bilibino nuclear cogeneration plant based on the insitu disposal option "
original_title="Обоснование возможности вывода из эксплуатации Билибинской АТЭЦ по варианту «захоронение на месте»"
authors=["EngovatovIA", "AdiyatullinRH"]
tags=["decommissioning", "NPP unit", "decommissioning option", "in-situ disposal", "radiation safety", "radioactive waste", "dismantling of components", "buildings and structures"]
rubric = "decommissioning"
rubric_name = "Decommissioning"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.07"

+++

The problem of the NPP decommissioning after the end of the specified or extended life has reached the practical solution stage for countries possessing a nuclear power industry. The major decommissioning options, both in Russia and abroad, include immediate dismantling and deferred dismantling. At the same time, there are NPP units for which, for a number of reasons, none of the two options are acceptable in terms of ensuring personnel, public and environment safety. Disposal, a third and a more rare option, shall be used for decommissioning in this case. The purpose of the work is to provide rationale for the possibility of decommissioning Bilibino Nuclear Cogeneration Plant based on the In-situ Disposal Option by covering the main building with an inert material with the formation of a mound. The option has been selected considering the results of an integrated analysis taking into account the geographical, operational, radiological, and socio-economic factors, as well as based on a limited experience of decommissioning commercial uranium-graphite reactors both within and beyond Russia. In accordance with Russian law, the decommissioning stage will start after spent nuclear fuel is withdrawn from the unit and removed. Emphasis is placed on the proposed option preparation and implementation issues. Dates and sequences for the performance of operations to dismantle the components and civil works of buildings and structures, as well as the onsite protective mound formation structure and composition are discussed. The geometrical dimensions, as well as the quantities and types of the mound-forming materials have been estimated. The key mound- forming materials will be fragments of the components, the biological shielding, and the civil works, as well as local materials. 

### References

1. Laraia M. Nuclear Decommissioning. Planning, Execution and International Experience. Woodhead Publishing Limited – 2012. – 805 p. 
2. Decommissioning Strategies for Facilities Using Radioactive Material, Safety Reports Series No. 50, IAEA, Vienna, 2007. 
3. Engovatov I.A., Mashkovich V.P., Orlov Yu.V., Pologikh B.G., Khlopkin N.S., Tsypin S.G. Radiation Safety Assurance: Decommissioning Nuclear Reactors at Civil and Military Installations. Monographia. Arlington, VA 22201 USA 2005. ISTC Science and Technology Series. 2005, v. 4, 201 p. 
4. Selecting Strategies for the Decommissioning of Nuclear Facilities. Nuclear Energy Agency Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development. OECD, 2006, 41 p. 
5. Bolshov L.A., Laverov N.P., Linge I.I. Problems of Nuclear Legacy and Solution Paths. Decommissioning. Moscow. IBRAE RAN Publ., 2015, v. 3, 316 p. (in Russian). 
6. Linge I.I., Abramov A.A. Best Foreign Decommissioning Practices for Decommissioning of Nuclear Plants and Rehabilitation of Contaminated Territories. Moscow. IBRAE RAN Publ., 2017, v. 1, 366 p. (in Russian). 
7. Belkin D.Yu., Ivanov I.A., Tananayev I.G. Concept of Decommissioning Commercial Uranium-Graphite Reactors (PA Mayak, Chelyabinsk Region). Vestnik DVO RAN. 2018, no. 3, pp. 58-64 (in Russian). 
8. Gavrilov P.M., Ustinov A.A., Antonenko M.V., Gorobchenko A.D., Sokolov K.Yu., Zhirnikov D.V. Decommissioning of Commercial Uranium-Graphite Reactors at Siberian Chemical Combine. Bezopasnost Yadernykh Tekhnologiy i Okruzhayushchey Sredy. 2011, no. 3, pp. 17- 23 (in Russian). 
9. Bilibino NPP. Available at: https://atomenergy.my1.ru/index/bilibinskaja_aehs/0-7 (accessed Jan 20, 2020) (in Russian). 
10. Bylkin B.K., Engovatov I.A. Decommissioning of Reactor Plants. Moscow. NIU MGSU Publ. 2014, 228 p. (in Russian). 
11. IAEA. Decommissioning of Facilities. General Safety Requirements. Part 6 No. GSR Part 6. Vienna, IAEA, 2014, 23 p. 
12. NP-001-15. General provisions for ensuring the safety of nuclear power plants. Moscow. FBU «NTC YaRB» Publ., 57 p. (in Russian).
13. Baryshnikov M.V., Suvorova Ye.V., Khaperskaya A.V., Shorokhov N.A. Intermediate Results and Prospects of SNF Handling at Bilibino NPP. Bezopasnost Yadernykh Tekhnologiy   i Okruzhayushchey Sredy. 2012, no. 3, pp. 23-28 (in Russian). 
14. Korovkin S.V., Tutunina Ye.V. Mound technology for isolation of decommissioned NPPs // Bezopasnost Yadernykh Tekhnologiy i Okruzhayushchey Sredy. 2012, no. 3, pp.37-45 (in Russian). 
15. International Atomic Energy Agency, On8Site Disposal as a Decommissioning Strategy. IAEATECDOC-1124, IAEA, Vienna, 1999. 
16. Bylkin B.K., Engovatov I.A., Zaytsev A.N., Zimin V.K., Rubtsov P.M., Nozdrin G.N. Improvement of regulatory documents on NPP decommissioning. Atomnaya Energiya. 2009, v. 107, iss. 6, pp. 307-312 (in Russian). 
17. Bylkin B.K., Gorelov K.A., Engovatov I.A., Zaytsev A.N., Zimin V.K., Rubtsov P.M. The requirement for revising the NPP decommissioning regulatory framework. Bezopasnost Yadernykh Tekhnologiy i Okruzhayushchey Sredy. 2013, no. 1, pp. 34-41 (in Russian). 