+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:15:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="08"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/08.pdf"
first_page="85"
last_page="96"
udc="614.7"
title="Radioecological monitoring of atmospheric air in the vicinity of the Rooppur NPP (People’s Republic of Bangladesh)"
original_title="Радиационно-экологический мониторинг атмосферного воздуха в зоне воздействия АЭС «Руппур» (Народная Республика Бангладеш) "
authors=["KurbakovDN", "GeshelIV", "PavlovAN", "SnegirevAS", "PanovAV"]
tags=["nuclear power plants", "radioecological monitoring", "atmospheric air and precipitation", "People’s Republic of Bangladesh", "dust", "radionuclides", "radon"]
rubric = "environmentalaspec"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.08"

+++

The paper presents the experience of conducting integrated radioecological monitoring of surface air in the region where the Ruppur NPP (People’s Republic of Bangladesh) is located at the initial stages of the nuclear plant life cycle. The authors developed a monitoring program, a list of the studied parameters, an observation schedule, and instrumentation support. At different distances from the NPP, posts were selected for sampling surface air and atmospheric deposition. Among the controlled parameters, the following were considered: radionuclide composition, including natural (40K, 222Ra, 226Ra, 232Th) and technogenic (54Mn, 60Co, 90Sr, 137Cs) isotopes, dust level. Monitoring studies were conducted in 2014 – 2017: at the background level and the plant construction phase, taking into account the climatic characteristics of the region in different seasons of the year. The results of monitoring observations made it possible to determine the effect of the plant construction on the change in the concentration of dust in the surface air and the absence of a detectable increase in its radionuclide content. The volumetric activity of radioisotopes in air over the entire period of research was at the level of the detection threshold (40K < 3.3⋅10–2, 226Ra < 0.01⋅10–2, 232Th < 1.4⋅10–3, 90Sr < 1,3⋅10–5, 137Cs < 1.5⋅10–3Bq/m3) and was determined by global deposition. The climate effect on the dust content in the air during the year was also noted – from the minimum values (0.06 mg/m3) in the monsoon period (JuneSeptember) to the maximum (0.24 mg/m3) exceeding the established standards (0.15 mg/m3) in the dry period (December). 

The radon hazard studies of the Ruppur NPP construction site were also carried out. The results of measurements of the radon flux density indicate the safety of the plant’s location area in terms of this radionuclide content. In almost all the air samples taken, the radon flux density was lower than 80 Bq/m3, while the permissible limit for residential and public buildings and structures to be commissioned after the plant construction, major repairs or reconstruction is at the level of 100 Bq/m3. 

The established network of radiation and environmental monitoring of surface atmospheric air will make it possible to register changes in the situation in the Ruppur NPP’s location area and to identify the effect of the plant’s work on the radioecological situation in this region. 

### References

1. International Atomic Energy Agency, INPRO Methodology for Sustainability Assessment of Nuclear Energy Systems: Environmental Impact of Stressors, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series, Vienna, 2016, no. NG-T-3.15. IAEA. 
2. Vasyanovich M., Vasilyev A., Ekidin A, Kapustin I., Kryshev A. Special monitoring results for determination of radionuclide composition of Russian NPP atmospheric releases. Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 2019, no. 51, pp. 1176-1179. DOI: 10.1016.
3. SanPiN 2.6.1.24-03 Sanitary Rules for Design and Operation of Nuclear Power Plants (SP AS-03). Moscow. UralYurIzdat Publ., 2003, 40 p. (in Russian). 
4. Beslepkin V.V., Semashko S.E., Frolov A.S. NPP-2006 Project: Radiation Impact on the Environment. Bezopasnost’ Okruzhayuschey Sredy, 2009, no. 3, pp. 135-137 (in Russian). 
5. Development and establishment of standards for maximum permissible emissions of radioactive substances of nuclear power plants into the atmospheric air. Technique. MT 1.2.1.15.1176-2016. Moscow. Rosenergoatom Publ., 2016, 76 p. (in Russian). 
6. IAEA Safety Guide RS-G-1.8. Environmental and Source Monitoring for Purposes of Radiation Protection. Vienna. IAEA, 2005, 136 p. 
7. MU 2.6.1.2838-11 Radiation monitoring and sanitary and epidemiological assessment of residential, public and industrial buildings and structures after completion of their construction, overhaul, reconstruction according to radiation safety indicators: Methodological instructions. Moscow. Federal Center for Hygiene and Epidemiology of Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2011, 26 p. (in Russian). 
8. Environmental monitoring of the environment in the areas of nuclear power plants. Monograph. Ed. V.A. Grachev. Moscow. Aksi-M Publ., 2013, 176 p. (in Russian). 
9. Radioecological situation in the regions of Rosatom under enterprises. Ed. I.I. Linge and I.I. Kryshev. Moscow. SAM Poligrafist Publ., 2015, 296 p. (in Russian). 
10. Design of control and control systems for IAEA nuclear power plants. Vienna, 2018, 228 p. (in Russian). 
11. Safety Guide, IAEA Nuclear Energy Series No. RS-G-1.8. International Atomic Energy Agency. Environmental and source monitoring for purposes of radiation protection. Vienna. IAEA, 2015. 136 p. 
12. Panov A.V., Sanzharov N.I., Kuznetsov V.K., Spiridonov S.I., Kurbakov D.N. Analysis of approaches to radiation and environmental monitoring in the areas of placement of nuclear and radiation-dangerous objects. Overview. Radiatsiya i Risk. 2019, v. 28, no. 3, pp. 75-95; DOI: 10.21870/0131-3878-2019-28-3-75-95 (in Russian). 
13. Environmental Baseline Report Rooppur Nuclear Power Plant Project. Bangladesh. Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission, 2012. 15 p. 
14. Akonda A.W. A directory of Asian wetlands. Ed D.A. Scott. Switzerland. In: IUCN, 1989, pp. 541-581. 
15. SP 151.13330.2012 Engineering surveys for NPP placement, design and construction. Part I Engineering survey for development of pre-design documentation (selection of a point and selection of NPP location site). Moscow. FAU «TsFS» Publ., 2013. 187 p. (in Russian). 
16. SP 151.13330.2012 Engineering surveys for NPP placement, design and construction. Part II Engineering survey for development of design and working documentation and construction support. Moscow. FAU «TsFS» Publ., 2013, 155 p. (in Russian). 
17. RD 52.04.186-89 Guidelines for the Control of Atmospheric Pollution. Moscow. Hydrometeoizdat Publ., 1991, 327 p. (in Russian). 
18. OST 95-10123-85 Nature protection. Atmosphere. General requirements for sampling radioactive aerosols from the surface layer. Moscow. Standards Publishing, 1985, 20 p. (in Russian). 
19. GOST 17.1.5.05-85 Nature Protection. Hydrosphere. General requirements for sampling surface and sea waters, ice and atmospheric precipitation. Moscow. Standards Publishing, 1985, 12 p. (in Russian). 
20. MU 2.6.1.037-2015 Determination of average annual values of EROA of radon isotopes in the air of rooms by the results of measurements of different duration. Moscow. FMBA of Russia Publ., 2016, 48 p. (in Russian). 
21. НРБ-99/2009 Radiation Safety Standards: Sanitary and Epidemiological Rules and Standards.  Moscow. Federal Center for Hygiene and Epidemiology of the Russian Federation, 2009, 100 p. (in Russian) 
22. Roshev I.I.,Khandogina E.K., Pakhomov A.Y. Use of risk analysis to determine integral indicators of radiation state of the environment in areas of NPP location  News of higher educational institutions. Nuclear power. 2009, no. 4, pp. 54-60 (in Russian). 
23. Gaziev I.J., Roshev A.I. Model calculations of radioactive contamination of the atmosphere, terrain, agricultural products and doses of radiation of the population in the observation area of Novovoronezhskaya NPP. Radiation and risk (Bulletin of the National Radiation and Epidemiological Register), 2010, v. 19, no. 1,pp. 48-59 (in Russian). 
24. Kryshev I.I., Bulgarian V. G., Kryshev A.I. Monitoring of radioactivity of the ground air layer and atmospheric deposition in the area of NPP location. Atomnaya Energiya. 2019, v. 126,  no. 4, pp. 228-234; DOI: 10.1007/s10512-019-00548-8 (in Russian). 
25. Radiation situation on the territory of Russia and neighboring states in 2011 – 2017. Year' books of Roshydromet. Obninsk. NPO Tayfun (in Russian). 
26. GN 2.1.6.2309-07 Indicative Safe Exposure Levels (PLAL) of Pollutants in the Atmospheric Air of Populated Areas: Hygienic Standards. Moscow: Federal Center for Hygiene and Epidemiology of Rospotrebnadzor Publ., 2008, 134 p. (in Russian). 
27. SP 11-102-97 Engineering and Environmental Survey for Construction: Set of Rules. Moscow. PNIIIS Gosstroy of Russia Publ., 1997, 42 p. (in Russian). 