+++

categories="article"
date="2020-07-09T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2020-02"
issue_name="2020 - #02"
issue_id="2"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2020/02/14.pdf"
first_page="156"
last_page="167"
udc="539.172.4"
title="Experimental determination of the induced activity in activation detectors of a complex geometric shape"
original_title="Экспериментальное определение наведенной активности в образцах активационных детекторов сложной геометрической формы"
authors=["IbragimovRF", "KokorevYaA", "DenisenkoAP", "RyabevaEV", "SamosadnyVT", "HasnaouiH"]
tags=["activation detectors", "neutron radiation", "induced activity", "mathematical simulation", "Geant4", "geometric factor"]
rubric = "physicsinnuclearpowerengineering"
rubric_name = "Physics in nuclear power engineering"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2020.2.14"

+++

The paper presents the results of experimental determination of the induced activity in copper-/aluminum-based activation detectors when irradiated with neutrons with energy of about 14 MeV. The activation detectors were square-shaped metal plates with a thickness from 1.0 to 1.5 mm and a side size about 5.0 cm. Such samples require a specific method for measuring the induced activity, which will take into account large sizes of the plate relate to the size of gamma-detector or neutron source. The detectors described in this work can be used to study low-intensity neutron fluxes (with a flux density of up to 106 n/cm2⋅s). It is shown that, when working with such detectors, the usual methods for calculating the induced activity in thin activation detectors are applicable, with corrections that take into account the emerging features of the “neutron source – activation detector” and “activation detector – secondary radiation detector” geometries. The effects of absorption of primary and secondary radiation by the detector substance are also revealed. 

The Geant4 tools were used to calculate the geometric factors and theoretical induced activity value. The study confirms the applicability of such activation detectors for solving the problem of determining the yield of neutrons with energy of about 14 MeV from a neutron generator target. The results of the experiments coincide, within the margin of error, with the results of simulations performed using the Geant4 tools. 

### References

1. Andrukhovich S.K., Marcinkevich B.A., Hilmanovich A.M. The use of short-lived radionuclides for real-time reconstruction of the neutron spectrum of nuclear physics facilities Vestnik Nacionalnoy Akademii Nauk Belorussii. 2010, no. 3, pp. 110-118 (in Russian). 
2. Jungmin Jo. Initial result of neutron energy spectrum reconstruction using multi-foil activation method in KSTAR. Fusion Engineering and Design. 2018, no. 136, pp. 793–796. DOI: 10.1016/j.fusengdes.2018.04.010 . 
3. Uddin M.S., Zulquarnain M.A., Qaim S.M. Fast neutron spectrum unfolding of a TRIGA Mark II reactor and measurement of spectrum-averaged cross sections. Radiochimca Acta. 2013, no. 101, pp. 613-620. DOI: 10.1524/ract.2013.2073 . 
4. Pierre C., Gilles G., Guillaume Rousseau, Xavier Jacquet, Nicolas Authier. Characterization of the CALIBAN Critical Assembly Neutron Spectra using Several Adjustment Methods Based on Activation Foils Measurement EPJ Web of Conferences. 2016, no. 106, pp 1-8. DOI: 10.1051/ epjconf/201610607005 . 
5. Noba C.R. Neutron spectrum unfolding for the development of a novel neutron detector for fusion. Fusion Engineering and Design. 2019, no. 146, pp. 2658-2662. DOI: 10.1016/ j.fusengdes.2019.04.074 . 
6. Medkour Ishak-Boushaki G. et al. Fast neutron spectrometry using thick threshold detectors. EPJ Web of Conferences. 2012, no. 24, pp. 1-9. DOI: 10.1051/epjconf/20122407009 . 
7. Lebaron-Jacobs Laurence, Gaillard-Lecanu E., Briot F. Dosimetric management during a criticality accident. Nuclear Technology. 2008, no. 161, pp. 27-34. 
8. Vagena E. Thick-foils activation technique for neutron spectrum unfolding with the MINUIT routine – Comparison with GEANT4 simulations. Nuclear Inst. and Methods in Physics Research, A. 2018, no. 887, pp. 64-69. DOI: 10.1016/j.nima.2018.01.025 
9. Neutron generators for elemental analysis of substances and materials. Available at: http:/ /www.vniia.ru/production/incl/prospekt_element.pdf (accessed Jan 15, 2020). 
10. Allison J. (Geant4 Collaboration) et al. Recent developments in Geant4 Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment. 2016, no. 835, pp. 186-225. DOI: 10.1016/ j.nima.2016.06.125 . 
11. Bushuev A.V., Kozshin A.F., Aleeva T.B. Practical spectrometry of nuclear radiation. Tutorial. Moscow. NRNU MEPhI Publ., 2016. 260 p. (in Russian). 