+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:23:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="01"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/01.pdf"
first_page="5"
last_page="18"
udc="621.039.4; 04.652"
title="Ontologies and databases on thermophysical properties of nuclear reactor materials"
original_title="Онтологии и базы данных по теплофизическим свойствам реакторных материалов"
authors=["ChusovIA", "KirillovPL", "PronyaevVG", "ErkimbaevAO", "ZitsermanVYu", "KobzevGA", "FokinLR"]
tags=["thermophysical properties", "reactor materials", "nuclear fuel", "ontology", "database", "data integration", "JSON-format"]
rubric = "currentissues"
rubric_name = "Current issues in nuclear energy"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.01"

+++

The study is dedicated to the information technologies for storage, systematization and distribution of thermophysical data for nuclear power engineering. The general trend existing in the areas involving wide use of scientific data is the shifting from conventional databases to the development of a consolidated infrastructure capable of overcoming sharply growing volumes of scientific data with continuously increasing complexity of the data structure due to the expansion of the range of materials. The above infrastructure ensures interoperability, including data exchange and dissemination. The general principle of data management for thermophysical properties of the nuclear reactor materials based on the subject-oriented ReactorThermoOntology (RTO) is suggested in the present paper. The ontology includes a unified glossary of all concepts, expanded through logical connections and axioms. The suggested RTO ontology combines the terms typical for reactor materials, their characteristics, as well as all types of information entities, determining textual, mathematical and computer structures. In the coded form, the ontology becomes the control add-in that can integrate heterogeneous data. Its most important feature is the possibility of its permanent expansion, which is necessary with introduction of new materials and terms related to them, e.g. nanostructures characteristics. Beside the ontology, description of the reactor materials, the possible scenarios for the use of the ontology during the phases of design, operation and integration of autonomous resources, primarily databases, are examined in the paper. The use of Big Data technology with diverse variations of logical structures of the data is suggested as the most efficient tool for data integration. Joint use of the technologies which were applied separately before, such as exchange standard in the form of the structured text documents, data control based on the ontology and platform for the work with big data, allows the conversion of multiple existing primary resources (databases, files, archives, etc.) to the standard JSON text format for the subsequent semantic integration.

### References

1. Dudarev V.A. Integration of information systems on inorganic chemistry and material Science. Moscow. KRASAND Publ., 2016, 320 p. (in Russian).
2. Bizer C. Interlinking scientific data on a global scale. Data Science Journal, 2013, v. 12, pp. GRDI6-GRDI12.
3. Frenkel M. Global Information Systems in Science. Application to the Field of Thermodynamics. J. Chem. Engn. Data, 2009, v. 54, no. 9, pp. 2411-2428.
4. Uschold M., Gruninger M. Ontologies: principles, methods and applications. Knowledge Engineering Review, 1996, v. 11, no. 2, pp. 93-136.
5. Zhang X., Zhao C., Wang X. A survey on knowledge representation in materials science and engineering: An ontological perspective. Computers in Industry, 2015, v. 73, pp. 8-22.
6. Brodaric B., Gahegan M. Ontology use for semantic e-Science. Semantic Web, 2010, v. 1, pp. 149-153.
7. Knowledge Organization Systems and Semantic Technology. International Atomic Energy Agency. Nuclear Knowledge Management (NKM). Available at: www.iaea.org/nuclearenergy/nuclearknowledge/ (accessed Aug 10, 2018).
8. Erkimbaev A.O., Zitserman V.Y., Kobzev G.A., Kosinov A.V. Associating the ontologies with databases by properties of substances and materials. Nauchno!Tekhnicheskaya Informatsiya. Ser. 2, 2015, no. 12, pp. 1-6 (in Russian).
9. Chusov I.A., Kirillov P.L., Bogoslovskaya G.P., Yunusov L.K., Obysov N.A., Novikov G.E., Pronyaev V.G., Erkimbaev A.O., Zitserman V.Yu., Kobzev G.A., Trachtengerts M.S, Fokin L.R. Development of the system of reactor thermophysical data on the basis of ontological modeling. Journal of Physics Conference Series, 2017, v. 891, #012172.
10. Web Portal THERMOPHYSICS.RU. Available at: http://www.thermophysics.ru/RTO/index.html (accessed Aug 10, 2018) (in Russian).
11. Thermophysical Properties of Materials for Nuclear Engineering. Tutorial for students of specialty «Nuclear Power Plants». Ed. by Prof. P.L. Kirillov. Obninsk. IATE Publ., 2006, 182 p.
12. Mishra S., Kaity S., Banerjee J., Nandi C., Dey G.K., Khan K.B. U-PuO2, U-PuC, U-PuN cermet fuel for fast reactor. Journal of Nuclear Materials, 2018, v. 499, pp. 272-283.
13. Risovany V.D., Zakharov A.V., Muraleva E.M. New advanced absorbing materials for thermal reactors. VANT. Ser.: Fizika radiatsionnyh povrezhdeniy i radiatsionnoe materialovedenie, 2005, no. 3, pp. 87-93 (in Russian).
14. Erkimbaev A.O., Zitserman V.Y., Kobzev G.A, Fokin L.R. The logical structure of physicochemical data: Problems of numerical data standardization and exchange. Russian Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 2008, v. 82, no. 1, pp. 15-25.
15. Laallam F.Z., Kherfi M.L., Benslimane S.M. A survey on the complementarity between database and ontologies: principles and research areas. Int. J. Computer Applications in Technology, 2014, v. 49, no. 2, pp. 166-187.
16. Kogalovsky M.R. Ontology-based data access systems // Programming and Computer Software, 2012, v. 38, no 4, pp. 167-182.
17. Ashino T. Materials ontology: an infrastructure for exchanging materials information and knowledge. Data Science Journal, 2010, v. 9, pp. 54-61.
18. Lin L, Austin T, Ren W. Interoperability of materials database systems in support of nuclear energy development and potential applications for fuel cell material selection. Materials Performance and Characterization, 2015, v. 4, no. 1, pp. 115-130.
19. Erkimbaev A.O., Zitserman V.Yu., Kobzev G.A., Kosinov A.V. Standardization of Storage and Retrieval of Semi-structured Thermophysical Data in JSON-documents Associated with the Ontology. Proc. of the XIX International Conference «Data Analytics and Management in Data Intensive Domains» (DAMDID/RCDL’2017), Moscow, Russia, October 10–13, 2017. Available at: http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2022/paper36.pdf (accessed Aug 10, 2018).