+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:20:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="04"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/04.pdf"
first_page="41"
last_page="50"
udc="621.039.56"
title="Diagnostics of the crisis state of the PWR reactor on the basis of model of steaming of channel"
original_title="Диагностика кризисного состояния реактора ВВЭР на основе модели запаривания канала"
authors=["KachurSA"]
tags=["nuclear reactor", "crisis of heat exchange", "energy-release", "thermalphysic model", "identification", "neural nets"]
rubric = "thermalphysics"
rubric_name = "Thermal physics and thermal hydraulics"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.04"

+++

The offered mathematical model allows to promote safety of functioning of the such difficult system, as atomic reactor, defining a boiling process as one of above all displays of his functioning. A model enables in good time to forecast, localize and remove the emergency situation related to worsening of taking warm, due to the use of the direct measurings of parameters of heat exchange, minimization of indirect calculations and application of empiric formulas. The offered model extends the class of the decided tasks, I.e. it allows to pass from the task of authentication of parameters and state of nuclear reactor to the task of prognostication of crisis of heat exchange.

The offered way of providing of safe management allows to use all present hardwares of control and the reactor management and does not require additional material expenses for the reconstruction of the systems. Application of forecasting mathematical model enables to shorten time on the decision-making, expose the crisis of heat exchange on an early stage, which is not fixed by other control and control systems. It allows to prevent crisis situations without the use shield, application of which worsens the operating parameters of the reactor setting from appearance of transitional processes and poisoning of reactor by xenon.

The analysis of existent models and methods of diagnostics of nuclear reactor showed that their basic task consisted in authentication of current status of reactor on the basis of information by acting one from sensors, determination of possible limits of basic parameters, authentications of current situations. The functions of prognosis, as such, are absent.

It is possible to define the following ways of modification of the existent intrareactor control systems: 1) prognostication of intrareactor anomalies; 2) prognostication of the state of reactor and crisis situations; 3) transmission of functions of operator to the intellect systems.

Possibility of rapid diagnostics of the state of channel with the use of neuronet technologies is considered.

A model can be used for development of the systems of diagnostics of intrareactor anomalies and adaptive control systems by thermal power of nuclear reactor of the type PWR.

### References

1. Emelyanov I.Ya., Efanov A.I., Konstantsnov L.V. Scientific and Technical Control Bases by Nuclear Reactors. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1981, 360 p. (in Russian).
2. Emel’yanov I.Ya., Gavrilov P.A., Seliverstov B.N. Control and Safety of Nuclear Power Reactors. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1975, 280 p. (in Russian).
3. Kirillov P.L., Yur’ev Yu.S., Bobkov V.P. Reference Book Upon Heat5hydraulic Accounts. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1990, 360 p. (in Russian).
4. Bragin V.A., Batenin I.V., Golovanov M.N. Systems into the Reactor Control of APP with the PWR Reactors. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1987, 128 p. (in Russian).
5. Sharoevskij I.G., Domashev E.D., Arhipova A.P. Method of verification of beginning of boiling up of coolant in the channels of nuclear reactor. Promyshlennaya teplotekhnika, 2001, v. 23, no 4-5, pp. 114-121 (in Russian).
6. Sharoevskij I.G. Recognition of the modes of flow of diphasic stream in the channels of nuclear reactor on noises of technological parameters. Promyshlennaya teplotekhnika, 2000, v. 22, no 1, pp. 53-59 (in Russian).
7. Kovetskaya M.M. Crisis of heat exchange in the bunches of bars with twirling of stream. Promyshlennaya teplotekhnika, 2009, v. 31, no. 5, pp. 50-55 (in Russian).
8. Kachur S.A. Forecasting graphic-analytical model of process of the superficial boiling in the active zone. PWR. Sbornik nauchnykh trudov SNUYaEiP, 2009, no. 2 (30), pp. 18-25 (in Russian).
9. Popov I.A., Kachur S.A. Identification of process of the superficial boiling of coolant in the active zone APP with PWR. Sbornik nauchnykh trudov SNUYaEiP, 2009, no. 4(32), pp. 68-76 (in Russian).
10. Novikov I.I., Voskresenskij K.D. Applied Thermodynamics and Heat. Moscow. Atomizdat Publ., 1977, 352 p. (in Russian).
11. Kramer E. Y. Nuclear Reactors with Boiling Water. Moscow. Izdatel’stvo inostrannoy literatury Publ., 1960, 509 p. (in Russian).
12. Gerliga V.A., Skalozub V.I. Nucleate Boiling Flows in Nuclear Power Plant Power Equipment. Moscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1992, 520 p. (in Russian).
13. Dolinskij A.A., Sharaevskij I.G., Fialko N.M. The methodology for the recognition and verification of the crisis of heat transfer in rod assemblies. Promyshlennaya teplotekhnika, 2005, v. 27, no. 6, pp. 66-80 (in Russian).
14. Popov I.A., Domashev E.D., Sychev E.N., Zhuravlev A.A. Experimental setup and automated system of data collection and processing for simulation of emergency thermal-hydraulic processes. Promyshlennaya teplotekhnika, 2007, v. 29, no. 2, pp. 62-68 (in Russian).
15. Leont’ev A.I., Olimpiev V.V. The influence of intensification of heat transfer on the thermohydraulic properties of channels. Teplofizika vysokikh temperatur, 2007, v. 45, no. 6, pp. 925-953 (in Russian).
16. Kirillov P.L. New methods of intensification of surface heat exchange with boiling water. Atomnaya tehnika za rubezhom, 2005, no. 10, pp. 3-7 (in Russian).
17. Shapovalova S.I., Sharoevskij G.I. Environment of design of neuron nets for the decision of tasks of diagnostics of equipment of APP. Problemy programmirovaniya, 2008, no. 2-3, pp. 675-678 (in Russian).
18. Kachur S.А., Bogma A.S.. Modification of automatic control systems based on statistical and neural network methods. Energeticheskie ustanovki i tekhnologii. 2018, v. 4, no. 1, pp. 50-55 (in Russian).
19. Uosserman F. Neurocomputer Technique: Theory and Practice. Moscow, Mir, 1992, 237 p. (in Russian).
20. Hajkin S. Neural Nets: Complete Course. Moscow. Izdatel’skij dom «Vil’yams» Publ., 2006, 1104 p. (in Russian).