+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:19:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="05"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/05.pdf"
first_page="51"
last_page="61"
udc="621.039.73"
title="Nanofiltration fractionation of components of radioactive solutions – method of reducing the volume of waste"
original_title="Нанофильтрационное фракционирование компонентов радиоактивных растворов – метод сокращения объема изолируемых отходов"
authors=["ChugunovAS", "VinnitskyVA"]
tags=["radioactive waste", "radwaste", "nanofiltration", "complexation", "osmotic pressure", "reverse osmosis", "RO", "membrane permeability"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.05"

+++

Baromembrane purification methods in the composition of liquid radioactive medium processing complexes are increasingly included in the practice of radioactive wastemanagement. The results of a comparative study of the efficiency of the operation of nanofiltration and reverse osmosis (RO) elements under conditions of continuous phosphatization of a model solution are presented. Dependences on the change in permeability, working pressure in the brine chamber of the RO and nanofiltration apparatus and the salt content of the permeate are shown when the salt content in the nutrient solution varies. It is shown that under the conditions of a closed loop in liquid radioactive medium, the introduction of polyphosphates to stabilize the truly dissolvedforms of the existence of multiply-charged metals on the reverse osmotic membrane ofULP leads to a systematic deterioration of the permeability of the membrane at a fixed pressure in the apparatus. In the permeate of the system with a nanofiltration membrane VNF (Vontron NanoFiltration) contains a sufficiently high concentration of salts, which indicates the removal of sodium salts from the circuit, thereby reducing the osmotic pressure of the solution, which critically affects the yield of the purified solution. Thus nanofiltration in combination with chelating agents can be an effective tool for fractionation of components of radioactive solutions, ensuring the achievement of regulatory indicators for wastewater and biologically hazardous substances that are «eternal» insulated.

### References

1. Vasilenko V.A., Yefimov A.A., Yepimakhov V.N., Konstantinov Ye.A., Stepanov A.I., Stepanov I.K. The management of radioactive waste in Russia and countries with developed nuclear power. Saint-Petersburg. Morintekh Publ., 2005, 304 p. (in Russian).
2. Rjabchikov B.E. Decontamination of liquid radioactive waste. Moscow. DeLi print Publ., 2008, 515 p. (in Russian).
3. Ambashta R.D., Sillanpaa M.E.T. Membrane purification in radioactive waste management: a short review. Journal of environmental radioactivity. 2012, v. 105, pp. 76-84.
4. Zakrzewska-Trznadel G., Harasimowicz M., Chmielewski A.G. Membrane processes in nuclear technology-application for liquid radioactive waste treatment. Separation and purification technology. 2001, v. 22-23, pp. 617-625.
5. Pabby A.K. Membrane techniques for treatment in nuclear waste processing: global experience. Membrane technology. 2008, iss. 11, pp. 9-13.
6. Arzhanova E.B., Gladush M.G., Panteleev A.A., Rjabchikov B.E. Separation of mono and polyvalent ions by the method of nanofiltration in aqueous solutions of high concentration. Perspektivnye materially, 2010, no. 8, pp. 183-188 (in Russian).
7. Standardized methods for water analysis. Ed. Yu.Yu. Lur’e. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 1973, 376 p. (in Russian).
8. Nikitin V.D., Jakimec E.M., Timakova N.A., Rad’ko V.A., Shabashova N.V., Tribunskij V.V. Preparation of chelate compounds of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid with cations of some metals and methods for their analysis. Sbornik trudov Ural’skogo politehnicheskogo instituta im. S.M. Kirova «Primenenie trilona B v analizakh cvetnykh splavov». Sverdlovsk. 1963, pp. 94-103 (in Russian).
9. Criteria for acceptability of radioactive waste for disposal. NR-093-14. Yadernaya i radiacionnaya bezopasnost’, 2015, no. 3(77), pp. 59-82 (in Russian).
10. Zhdanov Yu.F. Chemistry and technology of polyphosphates. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 1979, 240 p. (in Russian).
11. Dytnerskij Yu.I. Baromembrane processes. Theory and estimation. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 1986, 272 p. (in Russian).
12. Shvedov V.P., Ivanova L.M., Zharikov V.I. Isolation of radioactive cesium from sea water. I. Isolation of cesium in the form of compounds with ferrocyanides of zinc, copper and nickel. Radiokhimiya, 1963, v. 5, no. 2, pp. 182-185 (in Russian).
13. Ivanova L.M., Shvedov V.P. Isolation of radioactive cesium from sea water. II. Isolation of cesium in the form of compounds with ferrocyanides of alkaline earth elements. Radiokhimiya, 1963, v. 5, no. 2, pp. 185-189 (in Russian).
14. Sharygin L.M., Muromskii A.Yu., Moiseev V.E., Tsekh A.R., Vaver A.V. Sorption purification of liquid radioactive wastes from nuclear power plants. Atomic Energy, 1997, v. 83, iss. 1, pp. 493-499.
15. Sharygin L.M., Muromskii A.Y. Inorganic sorbent for selective treatment of liquid radioactive wastes. Radiochemistry, 2004, v. 46, iss. 2, pp. 185-189.
16. Savkin A.E. Development and trials of a technology for reprocessing of NPP liquid radioactive wastes. Radiochemistry, 2011, v. 53, iss. 5, pp. 555-558.
17. Nechaev A.F., Chugunov A.S., Stepanov E.A. Modernization of technological platform for deep processing of radioactive wastes. Izvestiya SPbGTI(TU), 2010, no. 8 (34), pp. 66-70 (in Russian).
18. Vinnitskii V.A., Nechaev A.V., Chugunov A.S. Role of simple anionic ligands in deep decontamination of liquid radioactive waste. Radiochemistry, 2016, v. 58, no. 3, pp. 311-316.