+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:17:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="07"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/07.pdf"
first_page="71"
last_page="84"
udc="621.039.7:542.44"
title="The possibility of improving inherent safety BN-800 by the use of fuel assembly with (U, Pu)c microfuel"
original_title="Возможность повышения внутренней самозащищенности БН-800 за счет использования ТВС с микросферическим смешанным (U, Pu)c-топливом"
authors=["MaslovNV", "GrishaninEI", "AlekseevPN"]
tags=["inherent safety", "fast sodium reactors", "microfuel", "coated particles", "microspherical fuel", "fuel assemblies with coated particles", "tolerant fuel", "mixed carbide fuel"]
rubric = "fuelcycle"
rubric_name = "Fuel cycle and nuclear waste management"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.07"

+++

The task undertaken in the report is to increase inherent safety of the fast reactor with a sodium coolant of type BN-800 due to considering the possibility of using innovation fuel assemblies with mixed uranium-plutonium carbide fuel in form of coated particles. Fuel assemblies with pellet MOX fuel and fuel rods are directly replaced by microspherical mixed (U,Pu)C-fuel. Calculation evaluations of characteristics of fuel assemblies with microspherical fuel are realized.

A calculation comparison of neutron physics and thermal hydraulics characteristics of the innovation fuel assemblies with microspherical mixed (U,Pu)C-fuel and the traditional fuel assemblies with pellet MOX fuel and fuel rods was conducted.

The main positive moments of conversion to fuel assemblies (FA) with microspherical fuel are:
– increase of inherent safety in emergencies due to developed surface of heat removal, low part of stored heat and microfuel high temperature resistance.
– improvement of neutronics characteristics due to low fuel temperature, decrease of steel quantity in FA and use of highly heat conducting dense mixed carbide fuel in the closed fuel cycle.
– increase of fuel breeding ratio and decrease of reactivity margin; it is possible to optimize and improve these parameters further taking into consideration that study was conducted within the framework of BN-800 reactor core.

The chosen calculation model was BN-800 reactor core with MOX fuel, where a three-zone radial power density field flattening due to plutonium content change in fuel was used.

Thanks to microspherical carbide fuel, inherent safety of the reactor increases in accidents with loss of coolant flow and introduction of positive reactivity because the coated particles have developed heat-exchange surface and their coats are able to keep fission products at higher temperatures than the steel cladding of traditional fuel rods.

### References

1. Saraev O.M., Noskov Yu.V., Zverev D.L., Vasil’ev B.A., Sedakov V.Yu., Poplavskiy V.M., Tsiboulia A.M., Ershov V.N., Znamensky S.G. BN-800 Design Validation and Construction-Status. Atomnaya Energiya, 2010, v. 108, no. 4, pp. 197-201 (in Russian).
2. Matveev V.I., Homyakov Y.S. Technical Physics of Fast Reactors with Sodium Coolant. Moscow. Izdatel’skij dom MEI Publ., 2012, pp. 195-208, 311-318 (in Russian).
3. Poplavskiy V.M., Kyznetsov I.A. Safety of NPP with fast neutron specter. Moscow. IzdAT-Publ., 2012, pp. 243-272 (in Russian).
4. Novikov V.M., Slesapev I.S., Alekseev P.N., Ignatev V.V., Subbotin S.A. Nuclear Reactors Enhanced Safety. Analysis of Conceptual Development. Moscow. Energoatomizdat Publ., 1993, 384 p. (in Russian).
5. Fast Reactor Database, IAEATECDOC
1531. Vienna, Austria, 2007, 449 p. Available at: https://www-pub.iaea.org/books/IAEABooks/7581/Fast-Reactor-Database-2006-Update (accessed Sep. 21, 2018).
6. Alekseev P.N., Balanin A.L., Fomichenko P.A., Grishanin E.I., Ivanov E.A., Ponomarev A.S., Zakharko Yu.A. Development of Conceptual Proposal for a Nuclear Facility with the Gas Cooled Fast Reactor BGR-1000 Using Coated Microfuel and Technologies of Light Water Reactors. Paper C106. In Proc. of the PHYSOR-2006 Int. Conf. «Advances in Nuclear Analysis and Simulation». Vancouver, BC, Canada, September 14-16, 2006, pp. 1761-1764.
7. Alekseev P.N., Balanin A.L., Fomichenko P.A, Grishanin E.I., Ponomarev A.S., Sedov A.A., Zakharko Yu.A. Physical and Technical Basics of the Concept of a Competitive Gas Cooled Fast Reactor Facility with the Core Based on Coated Fuel Microparticles. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles. «Next Generation of Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development (FR17)». IAEA-CN245
517. Russia, Ekaterinburg, 26-29 June 2017. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/330480864_IAEA-CN245-205_IAEA_Study_on_Passive_Shutdown_Systems_for_Fast_Reactors_Status_Review (accessed Sep. 21, 2018).
8. Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N., Kuharkin N.E., Filippov G.A., Phalkovski L.N. Grishanin E.I. Prospects for the use Microfuel in the VVER. Atomnaya Energiya, 1999, v. 86, no. 6, pp. 443-449 (in Russian).
9. Filippov G.A., Phalkovski L.N. Trybachev V.M., Fonarev B.I., Mastykin V.P., Konditerov M.V., Momot G.V. Corrosion Resistance of Microfuel in Air with a Temperature of up 1200°C in Contact with the Elements of the Fuel Output From Their Assemblies Made of Austenitic Stainless Steel. Atomnaya Energiya, 2008, v. 104, no. 3, pp. 189-192 (in Russian).
10. Filippov G.A., Grishanin E.I., Falkovskiy L,N., Fonarev B.I., , Deniskin V.P., Kyrbakov S.D., Trybachev V.M., Momot G.V. Evaluation of the Stability of Protective Coatings on Microfuel in a Vapor-Gas Medium with Interaction with Structural Materials. Atomnaya Energiya, 2009, v. 106, no.3, pp. 153-158 (in Russian).
11. Grishanin E.I., Kyharkin N.E., Innovation with Microfuel. REA, 2099, no. 9, pp. 30-36 (in Russian).
12. Yaroslavtseva L.N. Program system JARB for calculation neutron physics of the reactors. VANT. Ser. Fizika i Tekhnika Yadernykh Reaktorov, 1983, no. 8 (37), pp. 41-43 (in Russian).
13. Sazikina T.A., Tihonov N.I. Studies of the Stress-Strain State and the Ways of Choosing the Optimal Design of a Microfuel Elements for High-Temperature Gas-Cooled-Reactors. VANT. Ser. Atomno-Vodorodnaya Energetika i Tekhnologiya, 1983, no. 3 (16), pp. 74-76 (in Russian).
14. Degalcev Y.G., Ponomarev-Stepnoy N.N., Kuznetsov V.F. Behavior of High-Temperature Nuclear Fuel During Irradiation. Мoscow. Energoizdat Publ., 1987, pp. 127-137 (in Russian).
15. Baturin V.G., Zelenyuk F.M. Neutrongraphical Studies of Structure Microfuel Materials. VANT. Ser. Atomnaya Tekhnika i tekhnologiya, 1990, no.2, pp. 86-92 (in Russian).
16. Krautwasser P., Nickel H. Influence of Porosity on the Irradiation Performance of Pyrocarbon on the Irradiation Performance of Pyrocarbon Coatings. Nucl.Technol., 1977, v. 35, pp. 310-319.
17. Chernikov A.S., Permyakov L.N., Fedik I.I, Gavrilin S.S., Kurbakov S.D. Spherical Fuel Particles with a Protective Coating for High Security Reactors. Atomnaya Energiya, 1999, v. 87, no. 6, pp. 451-462 (in Russian).
18. Grishanin E.I., Denisov E.E., Lyubin A.Ya., Falkovskiy L.N. Development the Mathematical Model for Calculating Parameters of the Coolant in the Fuel Assembly of a light Water Reactor with Microfuel. Tyazhyoloe Mashinostroenie, 1995, no. 9, pp. 11-20 (in Russian).
19. Philipov G.A. Melamed L.E. Tropkin. A.I. Methodology of Mathematic Simulation and Analysis of Hydro Dynamics for Systems Containing Pebble Beds and Perforate Walls, on the Basis of CAE System ANSYS. Izvestiya Vuzov. Problemy Energetiki, 2005, no. 11-12, pp. 64-79 (in Russian).
20. Philipov G.A. Melamed L.E. Tropkin. A.I. Influence of Headers Form and Sizes to Hydraulic Resistance of Header Devices with Pebble Beds. Izvestiya Vuzov. Problemy Energetiki, 2007, no. 1-2, pp. 8-20 (in Russian).
21. Maslov N.V., Grishanin E.I., Alekseev P.N. Improving inherent safety BN-800 by the use of fuel assembly with (U, Pu)C microfuel. Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: «Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development». FR-17.IAEA-CN245-303, 2017. Available at: https://conferences.iaea.org/indico/event/126/contributions/3676/ (accessed Sep. 21, 2018).
22. Maslov N.V., Fonarev B.I., Grishanin E.I., Alekseev P.N. Fast Neutron Nuclear Reactor with Liquid Metal Coolant. Russian Federation Patent for the Invention No. 2668230, 2018 (in Russian).