+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:14:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="10"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/10.pdf"
first_page="107"
last_page="118"
udc="546.798.22+621.039.7…16"
title="Treatment with large radiation contaminated tanks at the decommissioning of the research building «B» VNIINM"
original_title="Обращение с крупногабаритными радиационно-загрязненными емкостями при выводе из эксплуатации исследовательского корпуса «Б» АО «ВНИИНМ»"
authors=["KuznetsovAY", "AzovskovME", "BelousovSV", "VereshchaginII", "EfremovAE", "KhlebnikovSV"]
tags=["decommissioning", "radiation-contaminated equipment", "tanks", "extraction column", "dismantling", "uranium", "plutonium", "foam decontamination", "radioactive waste"]
rubric = "decommissioning"
rubric_name = "Decommissioning"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.10"

+++

The article presents the results of works on dismantling the equipment BRHS research building «B» VNIINM. The work was carried out within the framework of the withdrawal of building «B» from service. The purpose of the dismantling of large capacitive equipment – creating a place BRHS plot for RW management, form-corresponding with the decommissioning building «B». Works on decommissioning of the radioactively contaminated building within the megalopolis were carried out for the first time.

The characteristics of large-size capacitive equipment are presented. Radiation contamination of capacitive equipment is determined by long-lived α-emitting isotopes: 235U, 238U, 239Pu. The sequence of works on the dismantling of radiation-contaminated capacitive equipment, which includes preparatory work, dismantling of tank binding, localization of radioactive contamination of the external surface of the equipment, its dismantling, moving to the transport container.

Dismantling and decontamination of large-size capacitive equipment was carried out by the forces of the decommissioning Department of VNIINM. During the work used the following tools: for decontamination works -  mobile installation of foam decontamination, mobile high-pressure installation for applying a containment and decontamination coating films. Dismantling of tanks was made by means of the little spark equipment-saber saws. To move the dismantled equipment to the transport container, crane tracks were created, the movement was carried out with the help of a winch.

The main results of works on dismantling and decontamination of radioactively-contaminated eat bones are: 4 units of dismantled equipment of long column type high the from 4.2 m to 6.4 m; 26 dismantled tanks and equipment (maximum equipment capacity 8 m3); the inner surface of the contaminated equipment was decontamination (the ratio of decontamination was 25 – 70). As a result of decontamination works reduced activity of RW (changed class of radioactive waste 3 to 4).

The main conclusion on the treatment of large-size radiation-contaminated tanks during the decommissioning of the research building «B» works were organized and carried out at a high technical level, with the use of modern decontamination and dismantling equipment and the use of modern methods of ensuring the safety of work in the conditions of the location of the VNIINM site in Moscow.

### References

1. The order of April 19, 2007 No 484-r. About the approval of the Concept of the federal target program «Ensuring Nuclear and Radiation Safety for 2008 and until 2015». Available at: http://www.alppp.ru/law/bezopasnost-i-ohrana-pravoporjadka/3/rasporjazhenie-pravitelstva-rf-ot-19-04-2007—484-r.html (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
2. FTsP YaRB-2 archive. Federal target program «Ensuring Nuclear and Radiation Safety for 2016 - 2020 and until 2030». Available at: http://фцп-ярб2030.РФ/about/archiv/(accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
3. Federal law of the Russian Federation «About Radiation Safety of the Population (with Changes for July 19, 2011)». Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/9015351 (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
4. Sukhanov L.P., Kuznetsov A.Yu., Chernikov M.A., Voron’ko G.I. The Decommissioning of the «Nuclear Legacy» VNIINM. Bezopasnost’ okruzhayuschej sredy, 2013, no. 3-4, pp. 95-99 (in Russian).
5. Kuznetsov A.Yu., Savin S.K., Sukhanov L.P., Utrobin D.V., Chernikov M.A.. State of Affairs and Plans for Decommissioning of the Research Building «B» VNIINM n.a. academician A.A. Bochvar. Yadernaya i radiatsonnaya bezopasnost’ Rossii, 2012, v. 13, pp. 120-132. Available at: http://www.fcp-radbez.ru/images/stories/FCP/materiali/sb13.pdf (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
6. Sukhanov L.P., Kuznetsov A.Yu., Chernikov M.A., Savin S.K., Belousov S.V., Shirokov S.S. Preparation for Practical Works on Decommissioning of the Research Building «B» of JSC «VNIINM». Yadernaya i radiatsonnaya bezopasnost’ Rossii, 2013, v. 15, pp. 61-69. Available at: http://www.fcp-radbez.ru/images/stories/FCP/materiali/sb15.pdf (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
7. Kuznetsov A.Yu., Belousov S.V., Savin S.K., Komarov E.A., Udalaya M.V., Sobko A.A. The Main Results of the Decommissioning of the Research Building «B» of JSC «VNIINM». Atomnaya energiya, 2017, v. 123, no. 4, pp. 210-216 (in Russian).
8. 190-FZ. The federal law on the address with Russian joint stock company and about introduction of amendments to separate acts. Available at: http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_116552/ (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
9. Kuznetsov A.Yu., Azovskov M.E., Antsiferova E.Yu., Belousov S.V., Voron’ko G.I., Kotov A.L., Kukava V.J., Novoselova A.P., Savin S.K., Sukhanov L. P., Tuzov Yu.V., Shirokov S.S. The Work of the Initial Stage of the Decommissioning of the Research Building «B» of JSC «VNIINM». Yadernaya i radiatsonnaya bezopasnost’ Rossii, 2014, v 17, pp. 73-84. Available at: http://www.fcp-radbez.ru/images/stories/FCP/materiali/sb17.pdf (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
10. Kuznetsov A.Yu., Belousov S.V., Savin S.K., Azovskov M.E., Hlebnikov S.V., Efremov A.E., Vereschagin I.I., Shirokov S.S. The Study of Precipitation and Deposits in the Systems of Special Communications Building «B» JSC «VNIINM». Atomnaya energiya, 2016, v. 120, no. 3, pp. 162-164 (in Russian).
11. Vereschagin I.I., Belousov S.V., Efremov A.E., Hlebnikov S.V., Kuznetsov A.Yu. Ensuring Radiation Safety During Decommissioning of the Building «B» of JSC «VNIINM». VII Rossiyskaya molodezhnaya shkola po radiokhimii I yadernym tehnologiyam. Ozersk, 2016, p. 24 (in Russian).
12. NP-057-04 of the Rule of safety when decommissioning nuclear facilities of a nuclear fuel cycle. Available at: http://sudact.ru/law/prikaz-rostekhnadzora-ot-14062017-n-205-ob/np-057-17/ (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).
13. Savin S.K., Kuznetsov А.Yu., Shernikov M.A.Research & development and application of low waste decontamination technologies. Abstracts of V Interantional Conference Decommissioning challenges: Industrial Reality and Prospects. Societe Francaise d‘Energie Nuceaire, 2013, р. 31.
14. Sukhanov L.P., Kuznetsov А.Yu., Shernikov M.A. Decommissioning of nuclear legacy facilities of A.A. Bochvar research institute. Abstracts of V Interantional Conference Decommissioning challenges: Industrial Reality and Prospects. Societe Francaise d‘Energie Nuceaire, 2013, р. 49.
15. Efremov A.E., Belousov S.V., Vereschagin I.I., Kuznetsov A.Yu. Handling of large-size radioactive waste during decommissioning of the research building. VIII Rossiyskaya molodezhnaya shkola po radiokhimii I yadernym tehnologiyam. Radiochimiy-2015. Zheleznogorsk, 2015, p. 167 (in Russian).
16. Vereschagin I.I., Kuznetsov A.Yu.,, Belousov S.V., Savin S.K., Hlebnikov S.V. Work of the main and final stages of the decommissioning of the research building «B» JSC «VNIINM». Proc. of the Conf. «Ekologicheskaya, promyshlennaya i energeticheskaya bezopasnost’». Sevastopol’. SevGU Publ., 2017, pp. 244-246 (in Russian).
17. The resolution of the Government of the Russian Federation of 19.10.2012 No. 1069 «About criteria of reference of solid, liquid and gaseous waste to radioactive waste, criteria of reference of radioactive waste to special radioactive waste and to the deleted radioactive waste and criteria of classification of the deleted radioactive waste». Available at: http://base.garant.ru/70247038/ (accessed Oct 10, 2018) (in Russian).