+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:13:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="11"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/11.pdf"
first_page="119"
last_page="130"
udc="621.039"
title="Optimization of radiation protection at the NPP unit decommissioning stage"
original_title="Оптимизация радиационной защиты на этапе вывода энергоблоков АЭС из эксплуатации"
authors=["KropachevYuA", "TashlykovOL", "ShchekleinSE"]
tags=["nuclear power plant", "decommissioning", "database", "radiation protection optimization", "exposure dose", "integrated engineering radiological survey", "unscheduled measurements", "route optimization", "virtual training"]
rubric = "decommissioning"
rubric_name = "Decommissioning"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.11"

+++

The results of activities by JSC Concern Rosenergoatom, the operating organization, for introducing and optimizing radiation protection at NPPs are shown. Requirements to establishing the NPP decommissioning database are presented and the importance of its role in minimizing the personnel radiation exposure is shown. Ways are presented for implementing the principle of the NPP decommissioning radiation protection optimization. Components of the automated data processing subsystem for unscheduled measurements of radiological environment (ADPS UM RE) introduced as part of Beloyarsk NPP’s phase I units under the Program for Optimizing the Radiation Protection of Personnel at Nuclear Power Plants in Russia are described. A description of unscheduled measurements and respective measurement points is provided. Major sources of ionizing radiation at shut down NPP units are listed. The key functions of the ADPS UM RE are described (determination of inspection points and the radiation supervisor movement route during measurements, input and databasing of measurement results, methods for visualizing information on the parameters that characterize the radiological state of monitored items, protection of information against unauthorized access). Possible ways are shown for minimizing the personnel radiation exposure in the process of instrument-based measurements, sample taking and sample analysis (optimization of the movement route between inspection points, selection of measuring devices, analysis of earlier measurements, etc.). Requirements are presented to the selection of measurable radiation parameters for the particular facility.

Information is presented on joint studies conducted by experts at Ural Federal University, Beloyarsk NPP, and the Institute of Mathematics and Mechanics of the Ural Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences to develop the algorithm of optimizing the radiation supervisor movement routes considering the need for avoiding the obstacles with visiting the predetermined points (the radiation supervisor mission), and virtual models of radiation-hazardous rooms. The results of these studies will make it possible (using the database formed as part of the ADPS UM RE) to automate generation of the best possible radiation supervisor route, description of tasks for measuring the radiation environment parameters, and, accordingly, minimization of the radiation supervisor exposure doses.

### References

1. Remez V. P., Tashlykov O. L., Shcheklein S. E., Ioshin A. A., and Kuznetsov S. B. Increase in the Efficiency of Localization of Cobalt-60 and Cesium-137 Radionuclides from Liquid Radioactive Waste for Ensuring the Radiation Safety of Nuclear Power Plants. Yadernaya fizika i inzhiniring, 2016, v. 7, no. 2, pp. 129-137 (in Russian).
2. The Program of Personnel Radiation Protection Optimization at Nuclear Power Plants (2015-2019). Мoscow. АО «Kontsern Rosenergoatom» Publ., 2015, 32 p. (in Russian).
3. NP-001-15. Generalities of Safety Ensuring of Nuclear Power Plants. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2015, 75 p. (in Russian).
4. Tashlykov O., Shcheklein S., Sesekin A., Chentsov A., Nosov Y., Smyshlaeva O. Ecological features of fast reactor nuclear power plants (NPPs) at all stages of their life cycle. WIT Transactions on Ecology and the Environment, 2014, v. 190, no. 2, pp. 907-918.
5. Nosov Yu.V., Rovneyko A.V., Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E. Features of Fast Reactors Decommissioning BN-350 and BN-600. Atomnaya Energiya, 2018, v. 125, no. 4, pp. 195-199 (in Russian).
6. NP-012-16. Regulations of Safety Ensuring when NPP Unit Decommissioning. Moscow. Rostekhnadzor Publ., 2016, 32 p. (in Russian).
7. Naumov A.A., Tashlykov O.L. Minimizing dose costs in maintenance work on systems and equipment in NPP. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika, 2010, no. 1, pp. 80-88 (in Russian).
8. Tashlykov O.L. Methods of Assessing and Reducing Radiation Dose Loads in Maintenance Work at Nuclear Power Plants. Ekaterinburg. UGTU-UPI Publ., 2009, 168 p. (in Russian).
9. Tashlykov O.L. Repair of equipment of nuclear power plants. Ekaterinburg. UMTs UPI Publ., 2003, 168 p. (in Russian).
10. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Russkikh I.M., Seleznev E.N., Kozlov A.V. Composition Optimization of Homogeneous Radiation-Protective Materials for Planned Irradiation Conditions. Atomic Energy, 2017, v. 121, no. 4, рр. 303-307.
11. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.Ye., Lukyanenko V.Yu., Mikhaylova A.F., Russkikh I.M., Seleznev Ye.N., Kozlov A.V. The optimization of radiation protection composition. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika, 2015, no. 4, pp. 36-42 (in Russian).
12. Tashlykov O.L., Sesekin A. N., Shcheklein S.E., Balushkin F. A., Chencov A. G., Homjakov A.P. Mathematical Simulation Methods Capability for Solution of the Personnel Irradiation Decrease Problem. Voprosy Radiatsionnoy Bezopasnosti, 2009, no 4, pp. 47-57 (in Russian).
13. Balushkin F.A., Sesekin A.N., Tashlykov O.L., Cheblokov I.B., Shcheklein S.E., Chencov A.G. Using the Method of Dynamic Programming to Optimize the Removal of the Equipment NPP, Decommissioned, in Order to Minimize Exposure. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zawedeniy. Yadernaya Energetika, 2009, no 4, pp. 169-176 (in Russian).
14. Sesekin A.N., Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.Ye., Chentsov A.G. Route optimization in the removal of radiation hazards. WIT Transactions on Ecology and the Environment, 2014, v. 190, no. 2, pp. 919-926.
15. Tashlykov O.L., Shcheklein S.E., Klimova V.A., Naumov А.А. Modeling virtual radiation fields. Distantsionnoe i virtual’noe obuchenie, 2011, no. 4, pp. 24-34 (in Russian).
16. Toporkov R. The path to the forward echelon. Fast neutron, 2017, spec. iss. pp. 4-5. Available at: http://www.rosenergoatom.ru/upload/iblock/088/08895004b2b54e8a164678cb08bc988b.pdf (accessed Mar 05, 2018) (in Russian).
17. Kropachev Y.A., Tashlykov O.L. Optimization of radiation protection at NPP power units decomissioning. Proc. of the Scientific Conference «Perspektivnye energeticheskie tekhnologii. Ekologiya, ekonomika, bezopasnost’ i podgotovka kadrov». Еkaterinburg. UrFU Publ., 2016, pp. 50-57 (in Russian).
18. Grigoryev A.M., Tashlykov O.L. Solving a routing optimization of works in radiation fields with using a supercomputer. American Institute of Physics. AIP Conference Proceedings, 2015, 020028 (2018); DOI: 10.1063/1.5055101. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5055101 (accessed Mar 05, 2018). Table of Contents Available at:http://aip.scitation.org/toc/apc/2015/1 (accessed Mar 05, 2018).
19. Shan’sharov V.A., Tashlykov O.L. Creation of a three'dimensional model of a room with an increased radiation background. Proc. of the V International Young Researchers’ Conference. Physics. Technologies. Innovation PTI -2018. Ekaterinburg. UrFU Publ. 2018, pp. 57-59 (in Russian).