+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:11:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="12"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/12.pdf"
first_page="131"
last_page="142"
udc="504+539.16.04"
title="Complex radioecological monitoring in the vicinity of radiation hazardous facilities as an integral part of the unified system of state environmental monitoring"
original_title="Комплексный радиационноэкологический мониторинг в районе расположения радиационно опасных объектов как составная часть единой системы государственного экологического мониторинга"
authors=["SanzharovaNI", "PanovAV", "KuznetsovVK", "IsamovNN", "KarpenkoEI", "GordienkoEV", "MikailovaRA"]
tags=["radioecological monitoring", "concept", "radiation hazardous facilities", "environment", "radiation safety", "monitoring regulations"]
rubric = "environmentalaspects"
rubric_name = "Environmental aspects"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.12"

+++

The paper presents the main approaches to the formation and development of the system of environmental and radiation monitoring within the historical aspect. The article displays the analysis of national legislative and regulatory documents governing the ensuring of radiation safety of the environment in the areas affected by radiationhazardous facilities, and provides the principles of organizing state environmental and radiation monitoring. The characteristics of the state system of monitoring the radiation situation as an integral part of the Unified system of state environmental monitoring are given. The hierarchical structure of the unified state automated system of monitoring of radiation situation on the territories of the Russian Federation (USASMRS) is presented. The areas of competence and principles for the formation of departmental radiation monitoring systems (Rosgidromet, Rosleskhoz, Ministry of Agriculture, Rospotrebnadzor) have been defined. The procedure for organizing a network of radioecological monitoring, goals, objectives, observable objects and parameters is described. It is noted that the modern approach to assessing the impact of radiationhazardous facilities is based on a joint analysis of the radiation impact, both on humans and on the surrounding natural environment. The systems of radioecological monitoring provide an assessment not only of shortterm changes in the content of radionuclides in individual components of ecosystems, but also allow identifying longterm trends in the overall radiation situation. The monitoring results are the basis for the development of emergency response in case of emergencies at radiationhazardous facilities.

### References

1. Environmental Doctrine of the Russian Federation: Approved by Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of August 31, 2002 No.1225-r. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/901826347 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
2. Munn P. Global environmental monitoring system (GEMS). Action plan for Phase 1. SCOPE, Rep. 3. Toronto, 1973. 130 p.
3. Report of the International Meeting on Monitoring Held at Nairobi. 1974. 60 p.
4. Izrael’ Yu.A. Global Observing System. Forecast and assessment of changes in the state of the natural environment. Fundamentals of Monitoring. Meteorologiya i gidrologiya. 1974, no. 7, pp. 3-8 (in Russian).
5. Gerasimov I.P. The scientific foundations of modern environmental monitoring. Izvestiya AN SSSR. Ser.: Geografiya. 1975, no. 3, pp. 13-25 (In Russian).
6. On Environmental Protection: Federal Law of the Russian Federation dated January 10, 2002 No. 7-FZ (with amendments of 21.12.2017). Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/901808297/ (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
7. On state ecological monitoring (state environmental monitoring) and state fund of ecological (environmental) monitoring data: Ministerial Decree of the Russian Federation dated August 9, 2013 No 681. Available at: http://ivo.garant.ru/#/document/70430724/paragraph/1:0 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
8. On state monitoring of radiation situation on the territory of the Russian Federation (with the Regulations of organization and implementation of unified state automated system of monitoring of radiation situation on the territories of the Russian Federation (USASMRS) and its functional subsystems): Russian Government Resolution of 10 July 2014 No. 639. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/420207297 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
9. Radiation situation on the territory of the Russian Federation and neighbouring countries in 2015: yearbook. Obninsk. FSBI «RPA «Typhoon» Publ., 2016, 346 p. (in Russian).
10. RD 52.18.693-2007. The Unified State Automated System for Monitoring the Radiation Situation in the Territory of the Russian Federation: guidelines for radiation monitoring of contaminated areas in the late phase of a radiation accident. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/1200116384 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
11. Forest Code of the Russian Federation: Russian federal law of December 4, 2006, No. 200-FZ (with amendments of 03.08.2018). Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/ document/902017047 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
12. On approval of the Features of forest protection, development and implementation of preventive and rehabilitation measures in areas of radioactive contamination of forests: Order of the Ministry of Natural Resources of Russia of April 17, 2007, No. 101. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/902041238 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
13. Development concept of state monitoring of agricultural land and land used or provided to agriculture as a part of the lands of other categories of public land and the formation of information resources on these lands for a period of 2020: approved by Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of July 30, 2010 №1292-r. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/902228700 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
14. The Procedure of State Control for Soil Fertility Condition Indicators of Agricultural Lands: Annex to the Order of the Ministry of Agriculture of Russia of 4 May 2010 No. 150. Available at: http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_102700/ (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
15. Provision «On the system of state veterinary control of radioactive contamination of objects of veterinary supervision in the Russian Federation»: approved by the First Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Food of Russia V.N. Shcherbak, on February 20, 1998. Available at: http://www.consultant.ru/cons/cgi/online.cgi?req=doc&base=EXP&n=314178#004457716436616921 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
16. On the approval of the Provision on Conducting Social and Hygienic Monitoring (with amendments and additions as of May 25, 2017): Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of February 2, 2006 No. 60. Available at: http://docs.cntd.ru/document/901966842 (accessed Nov 21, 2018) (in Russian).
17. IAEA Radiation protection and safety of radiation sources: International Basic Safety Standards. Vienna. International Atomic Energy Agency. 2014. 436 p.
18. SP 151.13330.2012. Engineering surveys for location, design and construction of NPP. Moscow. Gosstroi Rossii Publ., 2012, 155 p. (in Russian).