+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:10:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="13"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/13.pdf"
first_page="143"
last_page="154"
udc="621.039.9, 004.896"
title="Application of spiking neural networks for modeling the process of high-temperature hydrogen production in systems with gas-cooled reactors"
original_title="Применение спайковой нейронной сети для моделирования процесса высокотемпературного производства водорода в системах с газоохлаждаемыми реакторами"
authors=["StarkovSO", "LavrenkovYN"]
tags=["spiking neural networks", "high-temperature gas-cooled reactors", "electro-optical neural commuting system", "hydrogen production forecasting", "centralized global parallel search circuit"]
rubric = "modeling"
rubric_name = "Modelling processes at nuclear facilities"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.13"

+++

The article considers a simulated possible scenario for the joint production of hydrogen and electrical energy using a high-temperature gas-cooled reactor. The considered model is based on a neural network system, which is used as a technological tool for generating control signals. The multi-layer direct-acting neural network is composed of spiking neural elements, the architecture of which is based on interacting reverberation loops. The electro-0optical commuting system considered in this article is the base for building a switching communication system between neurons. The use of optical communication and liquid crystal modulators simplifies the mass distribution of a signal to many neurons from different populations and the change of its parameters. This property is necessary to ensure the neural controller high performance. The approximating properties of a neural network are used to control a group of dual electrolytic cells. Each electrolyzer has a set of variables controlling the temperature, chemical composition and current density through the cell. The spiking network, exerting a control action on pairs of electrolytic cells, completely controls the process of low-0temperature electrolysis in a copper sulfate solution. The amounts of hydrogen produced at the cathodes of the grouped electrolyzers will be proportional to the amount of gas produced by the high-temperature electrolysis systems, in which nuclear reactors are the sources of thermal and electrical energy. Information coding is carried out by sequences of spiking pulses from groups of 4 neurons. This method of representing the control sequence elements minimizes a false change in the parameters of low-temperature electrolysis. Learning of the neural network system is carried out by a scattered search algorithm. The evaluation of the simulation efficiency has shown the feasibility of constructing hybrid models with a neural network control system, which do not require the use of expensive materials.


### References

1. Gupta Ram B. Hydrogen Fuel: Production, Transport, and Storage. CRC Press, 2008, 624 p. ISBN 9781420045758.
2. Cacuci Dan Gabriel. Handbook of Nuclear Engineering. Springer US, 2010, 3574 p. DOI: 10.1007 / 978-0-387-98149-9.
3. Applied Electrochemistry. Textbook for high schools. Ed. by A.P. Tomilova. Moscow. Khimiya Publ., 1984, 520 p.
4. Gray Paul R., Hurst Paul J., Lewis Stephen H., Meyer Robert G. Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits, 5th Edition. JohnWiley & Sons, Inc., 2009, 896 p.
5. Crecraft David, Gergely Stephen. Analog Electronics: Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing. 1st Edition. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2002, 425 p.
6. Yan Xing L., Hino Ryutaro. Nuclear Hydrogen Production Handbook. CRC Press, 2011, 939 p. ISBN 9781439810835. Series: Green Chemistry and Chemical Engineering.
7. Nuclear Production of Hydrogen: Nuclear Science (Third Information Exchange Meeting, Oarai, Japan 5-7 October 2005), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Nuclear Energy Agency. OECD Publishing, 2006, 414 p.
8. Gerstner Wulfram, Kistler Werner M. Spiking Neuron Models: Single Neurons, Populations, Plasticity. Cambridge University Press, 2002, 496 p.
9. Maass Wolfgang, Bishop Christopher M. Pulsed Neural Networks. A Bradford Book, 2001, 377 p.
10. Cichocki Andrzej, Amari Shun-ichi. Adaptive Blind Signal and Image Processing: Learning Algorithms and Applications. Wiley, 2002. 586 p.
11. Haykin Simon. Neural networks. A Comprehensive Foundation. Second Edition. Prentice Hall Inc., 1999, 1104 p.
12. Sterratt David, Graham Bruce, Gillies Andrew, Willshaw David. Principles of Computational Modelling in Neuroscience. Cambridge University Press, 2011, 404 p.
13. Gottlieb Irving. Practical Transformer Handbook. Elsevier science & Technology, 1998, 192 p.
14. Saleh Bahaa E.A., Teich Malvin Carl. Fundamentals of Photonics. Wiley-Interscience, 2007, 1200 p.
15. Moss F., Gielen S. Neuro-informatics and Neural Modelling. North Holland, 2001, 1080 p.
16. Wai-Kai Chen. Nonlinear and Distributed Circuits. CRC Press, 2005, 352 p.
17. Strongin R.G., Gergel’ V.P., Grishagin V.A., Barkalov K.A. Parallel Computations in Global Optimization Problems. Moscow. MGU n.a. Lomonosov Publ., 2013, 280 p. (in Russian).
18. Greshilov A.A. Mathematical methods of decisionmaking. 2-nd ed. Moscow. MGTU n.a. Bauman Publ., 2014, 647 p.