+++

categories="article"
date="2019-03-25T00:09:00+03:00"
issue="2019-01"
issue_name="2019 - #01"
issue_id="1"
number="14"
file="https://static.nuclear-power-engineering.ru/articles/2019/01/14.pdf"
first_page="155"
last_page="167"
udc="615.849.114"
title="Impact of secondary particles on microdistribution of deposited dose in biological tissue in the presence of gold and gadolinium nanoparticles under photon beam irradiation"
original_title="Влияние вторичных частиц на микрораспределение поглощенной дозы в биологической ткани в присутствии наночастиц золота и гадолиния при облучении фотонами"
authors=["KonobeevIA", "KurachenkoYA", "SheinoIN"]
tags=["nanoparticles of gold and gadolinium", "deposited dose", "photon beam therapy", "Geant4", "Monte Carlo simulation"]
rubric = "medicine"
rubric_name = "Nuclear medicine and biology"
outputs=["HTML", "DOI"]
doi="https://doi.org/10.26583/npe.2019.1.14"

+++

It is experimentally proven that nanoparticles of high-Z materials can be used as radiosensitizers for photon beam therapy. In the authors’ opinion, data available as of today on the impact of secondary particles (electrons, photons and positrons are generated in biological tissue by penetrating beam of primary photons) on the distribution of deposited dose during photon beam therapy in the presence of nanoparticles, are insufficient. Investigation of this impact constituted the main goal of this work.

Two-stage simulation was performed using Geant4 platform. During the first stage layer of biological tissue (water) was irradiated by monoenergetic photon sources with energies ranging from 10 keV to 6 MeV. As the result of this modeling spectra of electrons, photons and positrons were obtained at the depth of 5 cm. During the second stage the obtained photon spectra were used to irradiate nanoparticles of gold, gadolinium and water. Radial distributions of energy deposited around nanoparticles were obtained as the result of this modeling.

Radial DEF (Dose Enhancement Factor) values around nanoparticles of gold and gadolinium positioned in water at the depth of 5 cm were obtained after processing the collected data. Contributions from primary photons and secondary particles (electrons, photons and positrons generated in the layer of water with 5-cm thickness by the penetrating beam of primary photons) in the additional dose deposited around the nanoparticles were calculated as well.

It was demonstrated that layer of biological tissue placed between the source of photons and nanoparticles considerably changes the initial spectrum of photons and this change is significant in the analysis of mechanism of radiosensitization of biological tissues by nanoparticles for all energies of photon sources of (up to 6 MeV).

It was established that interaction of electrons and positrons with nanoparticles does not lead to significant increase of additional dose in the vicinity of their surfaces and can be most likely excluded from consideration in the analysis of radiosensitization mechanism of nanoparticles.

### References

1. Van Dyk J. Advances in modern radiation therapy. Available at https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jacob_Van_Dyk/publication/255609857_Advances_in_Modern_Radiation_Therapy/links/0f31753b4203dadbb9000000/Advances-in-Modern-Radiation-Therapy.pdf?origin=publication_detail (accessed Nov 8, 2018).
2. Connell P.P., Hellman S. Advances in radiotherapy and implications for the next century: a historical perspective. Cancer Research. 2009, v. 69, no. 2, pp. 383-392.
3. Lehnert S. Radiosensitizers and radiochemotherapy in the treatment of cancer. Boca Raton, Florida, USA: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, 2015, 548 p.
4. Bergs J.W., Wacker M.G., Hehlgans S., Piiper A., Multhoff G., Rцdel C., Rцdel F. The role of recent nanotechnology in enhancing the efficacy of radiation therapy. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. 2015, v. 1856, no. 1, pp. 130-143.
5. Sheino I.N. Dose-supplementary therapy of malignant tumors. Advances in Neutron Capture Therapy 2006. Proceedings of ICNCT-12. Edited by Y. Nakagawa, T. Kobayashi and H. Fukuda. Takamatsu, Kagawa, Japan, 2006, pp. 531-534.
6. Khokhlov V.F., Sheino I.N., Kulakov V.N., Mitin V.N., Nasonova T.A, Mitin V.N., Dobrynina O.A. The method of photon-capture therapy of tumors. Patent RF №2270045, 2006 (in Russian).
7. Kwatra D., Venugopal A., Anant S. Nanoparticles in radiation therapy: a summary of various approaches to enhance radiosensitization in cancer. Translational Cancer Research. 2013, v. 2, no. 4, pp. 330-342.
8. Chithrani D. B., Jelveh S., Jalali F., van Prooijen M., Allen C., Bristow R.G., Hill R.P., Jaffray D.A. Gold nanoparticles as radiation sensitizers in cancer therapy. Radiation Research, 2010, v. 173, no. 6, pp. 719-728.
9. Liu C.-J., Wang C.-H., Chen S.-T., Chen H.H., Leng W.H., Chien C.C., Wang C.L., Kempson I.M., Hwu Y., Lai T.C., Hsiao M., Yang C.S., Chen Y.J., Margaritondo G. Enhancement of cell radiation sensitivity by pegylated gold nanoparticles. Physics in medicine and biology. 2010, v. 55, no. 4, pp. 931-945.
10. Jain S., Coulter J.A., Hounsell A.R., Butterworth K.T., McMahon S.J., Hyland W.B., Muir M.F., Dickson G.R., Prise K.M., Currell F.J., O’Sullivan J.M., Hirst D.G. Cell-specific radiosensitization by gold nanoparticles at megavoltage radiation energies. International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics. 2011, v. 79, no. 2, pp. 531-539.
11. Hainfeld J.F., Slatkin D.N., Smilowitz H.M. The use of gold nanoparticles to enhance radiotherapy in mice. Physics in medicine and biology. 2004, v. 49, N309-N315.
12. Berbeco R.I., Korideck H., Ngwa W., Kumar R., Patel J., Sridhar S., Johnson S., Price B.D., Kimmelman A., Makrigiorgos G.M. DNA damage enhancement from gold nanoparticles for clinical MV photon beams. Radiation Research. 2012, v. 178, no. 6, pp. 604-608.
13. Butterworth K.T., McMahon S.J., Currell F.J., Prise K.M. Physical basis and biological mechanisms of gold nanoparticle radiosensitization. Nanoscale. 2012, v. 4, no. 16, pp. 4830-4838.
14. Tsiamas P., Liu B., Cifter F., Ngwa W.F., Berbeco R.I., Kappas C., Theodorou K., Marcus K., Makrigiorgos M.G., Sajo E., Zygmanski P. Impact of beam quality on megavoltage radiotherapy treatment techniques utilizing gold nanoparticles for dose enhancement. Physics in medicine and biology. 2013, v. 58, no. 3, pp. 451-464.
15. Detappe A., Kunjachan S., Rottmann J., Robar J., Tsiamas P., Korideck H., Tillement O., Berbeco R. AGuIX nanoparticles as a promising platform for image guided radiation therapy. Cancer Nanotechnology. 2015, v. 6, no. 1, p. 4.
16. Sheino I.N., Konobeev I.A., Izhevskiy P.V., Fedotov Yu.A. Estimation of relative biological effectiveness of heterogeneous microdistribution of the deposited dose in binary technologies of radiation therapy. Proc. of the VIth Scient. Conf. «Medical physics and innovations in medicine». Troitsk, 2014, pp. 223-226 (in Russian).
17. McMahon S.J., Hyland W.B., Muir M.F., Coulter J.A., Jain S., Butterworth K.T., Schettino G., Dickson G.R., Hounsell A.R., O’Sullivan J.M., Prise K.M., Hirst D.G., Currell F.J. Biological consequences of nanoscale energy deposition near irradiated heavy atom nanoparticles. Scientific Reports. 2011, v. 1, Article no. 18 (2011). Available at: https://www.nature.com/articles/srep00018?page=3 (accessed Nov 8, 2018).
18. Agostinelli S., Allison J., Amako K., Apostolakis J., Araujo H., Arce P., Asai M., Axen D., Banerjee S., Barrand G., Behner F., Bellagamba L., Boudreau J., Broglia L., Brunengo A., Burkhardt H., Chauvie S., Chuma J.,…, Zschiesche D. Geant4 – a simulation toolkit. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research. 2003, v. 506, no. 3, pp. 250-303.
19. Geant4 physics reference manual. Available at: http://geant4-userdoc.web.cern.ch/geant4-userdoc/UsersGuides/PhysicsReferenceManual/fo/PhysicsReferenceManual.pdf (accessed Nov 8, 2018).
20. Karamitros M., Luan S., Bernal M.A., Allison J., Baldacchino G., Davidkova M., Francis Z., Friedland W., Ivantchenko V., Ivantchenko A., Mantero A., Nieminem P., Santin G., Tran H.N., Stepan, V., Incerti S. Diffusion-controlled reactions modeling in Geant4-DNA. Journal of Computational Physics. 2014, v. 274, no. 1, pp. 841-882.
21. Incerti S., Ivanchenko A., Karamitros M., Mantero A., Moretto P., Tran H.N., Mascialino B., Champion C., Ivanchenko V.N., Bernal M.A., Francis Z., Villagrasa C., Baldacchino G., Guиye P., Capra R., Nieminen P., Zacharatou C. Comparison of Geant4 very low energy cross section models with experimental data in water. Medical Physics. 2010, v. 37, no. 9, pp. 4692-4708.
22. Cunha M., Monini C., Testa E., Beuve M. NanOx, a new model to predict cell survival in the context of particle therapy. Physics in medicine and biology. 2017, v. 62, no. 4, pp. 1248-1268.